The following is a conversation with Travis Oliphant, one of the most impactful programmers
and data scientists ever.
He created NumPy, SciPy, and Anaconda.
NumPy formed the foundation of tensor based machine learning in Python, SciPy formed
the foundation of scientific programming in Python, and Anaconda, specifically with Konda,
made Python more accessible to a much larger audience.
Travis's life work across a large number of programming and entrepreneurial efforts
has and will continue to have immeasurable impact on millions of lives by empowering
scientists and engineers in big companies, small companies, and open source communities
to take on difficult problems and solve them with the power of programming.
Plus, he's a truly kind human being, which is something that when combined with vision
and ambition makes for a great leader and a great person to chat with.
To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast, and here is my conversation with Travis Oliphant.
What was the first computer program you've ever written?
Do you remember?
Whoa, that's a good question.
I think it was in fourth grade, just a simple loop in basic.
Basic.
It was written on Atari 400, I think, or maybe it was Atari 800.
It was part of a class, and we just were just basic loops to print things out.
Did you use go to statements?
Yes.
Yes, we used go to statements.
I remember in the early days, that's when I first realized there's principles to programming
when I was told that don't use go to statements, those are bad software engineering.
It goes against what great, beautiful code is.
I was like, oh, okay, there's rules to this game.
I didn't see that until high school when I took an AP computer science course.
I did a lot of other kinds of just programming and TI, but finally, when I took an AP computer
science course in Pascal, that was Pascal.
That's when I, oh, there are these principles.
Not C or C++?
No, I didn't take C until the next year in college, I had a course in C, but I haven't
done much in Pascal, just that AP computer science course.
Now, sorry for the romanticized question, but when did you first fall in love with programming?
Oh, man, good question.
I think actually when I was 10, my dad got us a TI Timex in Claire, and he was excited
about the spreadsheet capability, but I made him get the basic, the add ons so we could
actually program in basic, and just being able to write instructions and have the computer
do something.
Then we got a TI 994A when I was about 12, and I would just, it had sprites and graphics
and music you could actually program to do music.
That's when I really sort of fell in love with programming.
So this is a full, like a real computer with like, with memory and storage and processors
so we're not going to say TI.
Yeah, the Timex in Claire was one of the very first, it was a cheap, cheap, like, I think
it was, well, it was still expensive, but it was 2K of memory.
We got the 16K add on pack, but yeah, it had memory and you could program it.
You had the, in order to store your programs, you had to attach a tape drive.
Remember that old, the sound that would play when you converted the modems would convert
digital bits to audio files, tape drive.
Still remember that sound, but that was the storage.
And what was the programming language, do you remember?
It was basic.
And then they had a VisiCalc.
And so a little bit of spreadsheet program in VisiCalc, but mostly just some basic.
Do you remember what kind of things drew you to programming?
Was it working with data?
Was it video games and video games?
Math.
Mathy stuff.
Yeah, I've always loved math and a lot of people think they don't like math because
I think when they're exposed to it early, they, it's about memory.
You know, when you're exposed to math early, you have a good short term memory, you remember
timetables.
And I do have a reasonably, I mean, not perfect, but a reasonably long little short term memory
buffer.
And so I did great at timetables and said, oh, I get a math, but I started to really
like math, just the problem solving aspect.
And so computing was problem solving applied.
And so that's always kind of been the, the draw kind of coupled with the mathematics.
Did you ever see the computer as like an extension of your mind, like something able
to achieve?
Not till later.
Okay.
Yeah.
Not then.
You could play with it and you can, you could play with math puzzles and yeah, it was, it
was too rudimentary early on, like it was sort of, yeah, it was too, it was a lot of
work to actually take a thought you'd have and actually get it implemented.
And that's still work, but it's getting easier.
And so yeah, I would say that's definitely what's attracting me to Python is that that
was more real, right?
I could think in Python, speaking a foreign language, I only speak another language fluently
besides English, which is Spanish, and I remember the day when I would dream in Spanish and
you start to think in that language.
And then you actually, I do definitely believe that language limits or expands your thinking.
There's some languages that actually lead you to certain thought processes.
Yeah.
Like, so I speak Russian fluently and that's certainly a language that leads you down certain
thought processes.
Is that right?
There's a, there's a history of the two world wars of the millions of people starving to
death or near to death throughout his history of suffering, of injustice, like this promise
sold to the people and then the carpet or whatever swept from under them and it's like
broken promises and all of that pain and melancholy is in the language, the sad songs, the sad
hopeful songs, the over romanticized, like, I love you, I hate you, the sort of the swings
between all the various spectrums of emotion.
So that's all within the language, the way it's twisted, poetry, there's a strong culture
of rhyming poetry, so like the bards, like the, there's a musicality to the language
too.
Did Dostoevsky write in Russian?
Yeah.
Like Dostoevsky, Tostoevsky, all the, all the, all the, the ones that I know about which
are translated and I'm curious how the translations.
So Dostoevsky did not use the musicality of the language too much, so they actually
translate pretty well because it's so philosophically dense that the story does a lot of the work,
but there's a bunch of things that are untranslatable.
Certainly the poetry is not translatable.
I actually have a few conversations coming up offline and also in this podcast with people
who have translated Dostoevsky and that's for people who worked, who work in this field
know how difficult that is.
Sometimes you can spend, you know, months thinking about a single sentence, right?
In context, like, because there's just a magic captured by that sentence and how do you translate
just in the right way because those words can be, can be really powerful.
There's a famous line, beauty will save the world from Dostoevsky.
You know, there's so many ways to translate that and you're right, the language gives
you the tools with which to tell the story, but it also leads your mind down certain trajectories
and paths to where over time, as you think in that language, you become a different human
being.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a fascinating reality, I think.
I know people have explored that, but it's, I guess, rediscovered.
Well, we don't, we live in our own like little pockets, like this is the sad thing is I feel
like, unfortunately, given time and given getting older, I'll never know the China, the Chinese
world because I don't truly know the language, same with Japanese, I don't truly know Japanese
and Portuguese and Brazil, that whole South American continent, like, yeah, I'll go to
Brazil and Argentina, but will I truly understand the people, if I don't understand the language?
It's sad because I wonder how much, how many geniuses we're missing because so much of
the scientific world, so much of the technical world is in English and so much of it might
be lost because they're, they just, we don't have the common language.
I completely agree.
I'm very much in that vein of, there's a lot of genius out there that we miss and it's
sort of, we're sort of fortunate when it, when it bubbles up into something that we
can understand or process, there's a lot we miss, so I tend to lean towards really loving
democratization or things that empower people or, you know, very resistant to sort of authoritarian
structures.
Fundamentally, for that reason, it, well, several reasons, but it just hurts us, we're
worse off.
So speaking of languages that empower you, so Python was the first language for me that
I could, I really enjoyed thinking in, as you said.
Sounds like you shared my experience too.
So when did you first, do you remember when you first kind of connected with Python, maybe
even fell in love with Python?
It's a good question.
It was a process that took about a year.
I first encountered Python in 1997.
I was a graduate student studying biomedical engineering at the Mayo Clinic and I had previously,
I'd been involved in taking information from satellites.
I was an electrical engineering student used to taking information and trying to get something
out of it, doing some data processing information out of it.
And I'd done that in MATLAB, I'd done that in Perl, I'd done that in, you know, scripting
on a VMS, there's actually a VAX VMS system and they had their own little scripting tools
around Fortran, done a lot of that.
And then as a graduate student, I was looking for something and encounter Python and because
Python had an array, had two things that made me not filter it away because I was filtering
a bunch of stuff.
I was Yorick, I looked at Yorick, I looked at a few other languages throughout there
at the time in 1997, but it had arrays, there's a library called Numeric that had just been
written in 95, like not very, not too much earlier.
By an MIT alum, Jim Hugenin, you know, and I went back and read the mailing list to see
the history of how it grew and there was a very interesting, it's fascinating to do that
actually to see how this emergent cooperation, unstructured cooperation happens in the open
source world that led to a lot of this collective programming, which is something maybe we might
get into a little later, but what that looks like.
What gap did Numeric fill?
Numeric filled the gap of having an array object.
There was no array object.
There was a one dimensional byte concept, but there was no n dimensional, two, three, four
dimensional tensor they call it now.
I'm still in the category that a tensor is another thing and it's just an nv array, we
should call it, but kind of lost that battle.
There's many battles in this world, some which will win, some we lose.
That's exactly right.
So and, but it was, it had no math to it.
So Numeric had math and a basic way to think in arrays.
So I was looking for that and it had complex numbers, a lot of programming languages.
And you can see it because, you know, if you're just a computer scientist, you think, ah,
complex numbers just too, too float.
So you can, people can build that on, but in practice, a complex number as a, as one
of the significant algebras that helps connect a lot of physical and mathematical ideas,
particularly to FFT for an actual engineer.
And it's a really important concept and not having it means you have to develop it several
times and those times may not share an approach.
One of the common things in programming, one of the things programming enables is abstractions.
But when you have shared abstractions, it's even better.
It sort of gets to the level of language of actually we all think of this the same way,
which is both powerful and dangerous, right?
It's powerful and that we now can quickly make bigger and higher level things on top
of those abstractions dangerous because it also limits us as to the things we left, maybe
left behind in producing an abstraction, which is at the heart of programming today
and actually building around the programming world.
So I think it's a fascinating philosophical topic.
Yeah, they will continue for many years, I think, as we build more and more and more
abstractions.
Yes.
I often think about, you know, we have, we have a world that's built on these abstractions
that were they the only ones possible?
Yeah.
There's a lot, but they led to, you know, it's very hard to do it differently.
Like there's an inertia that's very hard to, you know, push out, push away from.
There's, that has implications for things like, you know, the Julia language, which
you have heard of, I'm sure.
And I've met the creators and I like Julia.
It's a really cool language, but they've struggled to kind of against the, just the
tide of like this inertia of people using Python and, and, you know, there's strategies
to approach that.
But nonetheless, it's a, it's a phenomenon and sometimes, so I love complex numbers and
I love to raise.
So I, I looked at Python and then I had the experience.
I did some stuff in Python and I was just doing my PhD.
So I was out, my focus was on, I was actually doing a combination of MRI and ultrasound and
looking at a phenomenon called elastography, which is you push waves into the body and
observe those waves, like you can actually measure them.
And then you do mathematical inversion to see what the elasticity is.
And so that's the problem I was solving is how to do that with both ultrasound and MRI.
I needed some tool to do that with.
So I was starting to use Python in 97, in 98, I went back, looked at what I'd written
and realized I could still understand it, which is not the experience I'd had when doing
Pearl in 95, right?
I'd done the same thing.
And then I looked back and I, I'd forgotten what I was even saying.
Now, you know, I'm not saying it.
So I, that, that may, hey, this may work.
I like this.
This may be something I can retain without becoming an expert per se.
And so that led me to go, I'm going to push more into this.
And then that 98 was kind of the, when I started to fall in love with Python, I would say.
A few peculiar things about Python.
So maybe compared to Pearl, compared to some of the other languages.
So there's no braces.
Yeah.
So space is used, indentation, I should say, is used as part of the language.
Right.
So did you, I mean, that's quite a leap.
Were you comfortable with that leap?
Or were you just very open minded?
It's a good question.
I was open minded.
So it, I was cognizant of the concern.
And it definitely has, it has specific challenges, you know, cut and pasting, for example, your
cut and pasting code.
And if your editors aren't supportive of that, if you're putting it into a terminal, and
particularly in the past when terminals didn't necessarily have the intelligence to manage
it now.
Now, now I Python and Jupyter notebooks handle it just fine.
So there's really no problem.
But in the past, it creates some challenges, formatting challenges.
Also mixed tabs and spaces, if your, if editors weren't, you weren't clear on what was happening,
you would have these issues.
So there were really concrete reasons about it that I heard and understood.
I never really encountered a problem with it personally.
Like it was occasional annoyances, but I really liked the fact that it didn't have all this
extra characters, right?
That these extra characters didn't show up in my visual field when I was just trying
to process understanding a snippet of code.
Yeah, there's a cleanness to it.
But I mean, the idea is supposed to be that Pearl also has a cleanness to it because of
the minimalism of like how many characters it takes to express a certain thing.
So it's very compact.
Yeah.
So you realize with that compactness comes, there's a culture that prizes compactness.
And so the code gets more and more compact and less and less readable to a point where
it's like, like to be a good programmer in Pearl, you write code that's basically unreadable.
Right.
There's a culture like.
Correct.
And you're proud of it.
Yeah.
You're proud of it.
Right.
Exactly.
And it's like feels good.
And it's really selective.
Yeah.
And it's hard in Pearl to understand it.
Whereas Python was allowed you not to have to be an expert, you don't have to take all
this brain energy.
You could leverage what I say, you could leverage your English language center, which you're
using all the time.
I've wondered about other languages, particularly non Latin based languages, you know, Latin
based languages with the characters are at least similar.
I think people have an easier time, but I don't know what it's like to be a Japanese or a
Chinese person trying to learn a different, different syntax.
Like what would computer programming look like in a, in that, I haven't looked at that
at all, but it certainly doesn't, you know, leveraging your, your Chinese language center.
I'm not sure Python or any program names does that, but that was a big deal.
The fact that it was accessible, I could be a scientist.
What I really liked is many programming languages really demand a lot of you and you can get
a lot, you know, you do a lot if you learn it, but Python enables you to do a lot without
demanding a lot of you.
There's a, there's nuance to that statement, but it certainly was, it's more accessible.
So more people could actually, as a, as a scientist, as somebody or engineer who was
trying to solve another problem besides point programming, I could still use this language
and get things done and, and be happy about it.
And I was also comfortable in C at that time.
And MATLAB you did a little bit of that.
And MATLAB I did a lot before that, exactly.
So I was comfortable in those three languages were really the tools I used during my studies
and schooling.
Um, but to your point about language helping you think, one of the big things about MATLAB
is it was, and APL before it, I don't know if you're a, you remember APL, APL is actually
the predecessor of array based programming, which I think is really an underappreciated,
if I talked to people who are just steeped in computer programming and computer science,
like most of the people that Microsoft has hired in the past, for example, you know, Microsoft
is a company generally did not understand array based programming like culturally they
understand it.
So they kept missing the boat, kept missing the understanding of what this, what this was.
We've gotten better, but there's still a whole culture of folks that doesn't programming.
That's the, you know, that's, that's systems programming or web programming or lists and
maps and you know, what about an end dimensional array?
Oh yeah.
That's just an implementation detail.
Well, you can think that, but then actually if you have that as a construct, you actually
think differently.
APL was the first language to understand that and it was in the sixties, right?
The challenge of APL is APL had very dense, not only glyphs, like new characters, new
glyphs, they even had a new keyboard because to produce those glyphs, this is back in the
early days of computing when, you know, the qwerty keyboard maybe wasn't as established
like, well, we can have a new keyboard, no big deal, but it was a big deal and it didn't
catch on and the language APL very much like Pearl is people would pride themselves on
how much could they write the game of life in 30 characters of APL, APL has characters
that mean summation and they have adverbs, you know, they would have adjectives and
these things called adverbs, which are like methods, like reduction, it would be an adverb
on an ad operator, right?
But using these tools, you could construct and then you start to think at that level,
you think in end dimensions is something I like to say and you start to think differently
about data at that point, you know, now you're, it really helps.
Yeah, I mean, outside of programming, if you really internalize linear algebra as a course,
I mean, it's philosophically allows you to think of the world differently.
It's almost like liberating.
You don't have to, you don't have to think about the individual numbers in the end dimensional
array.
You could think of it as an object in itself and all of a sudden this world can open up.
You're saying MATLAB and APL were like the early, I don't know if many languages got
that right ever.
No, no, no, they didn't still, even still, I would say, I mean, NumPy is a, as an inheritor
of the traditions that I would say APLJ was another version that was what it did is not
have the glyphs just have short characters, but still a Latin keyboard could type them.
And then numeric inherited from that in terms of, let's add arrays plus broadcasting plus
methods, reduction, even some of the language like rank is a concept that's in, that was
in Python is still in Python for the number of dimensions, right?
That's different than say the rank of a matrix, which people think of as well.
So it's, it came from that tradition, but NumPy is a very pragmatic, practical tool.
NumPy inherited from numeric and we can get to where NumPy came from, which is the current
array, at least current as of 2015, 2017, now there's a ton of them over the past two
or three years.
We can get into that too.
So if we just sort of linger on the early days of what was your favorite feature of
Python?
Do you remember like what?
Yeah.
I think it's an interesting to linger on like the, what, what really makes you connect
with a language?
I'm not sure it's obvious to introspect that.
No, it isn't.
And I've thought about that.
It's just some length.
I'm not, I think definitely the fact that I could read it later, that I could use it
productively without becoming an expert.
And you, other languages I had to put more effort into.
Right.
That's like an empirical observation.
Like you're not analyzing any one aspect of language.
It just seems time after time, when you look back, it's somehow readable.
It's somehow readable.
And then it was sort of, I could take executable English and translate it to Python more easily.
Like I didn't have to go, there was no translation layer as an engineer or as a scientist.
I could think about what I wanted to do.
And then the syntax wasn't that far behind it.
Yeah.
Right.
Now there are some, there are some warts there still.
It wasn't perfect.
Like there's some areas where I'm like, it'd be better if this were different or if this
were different.
Some of those things got out of the language too.
I was really grateful for some of the early pioneers in the Python ecosystem back because
Python got written in 91 is when the first version came out.
But Guido was very open to users.
And one of the sets of users were people like Jim Huguenin and David Asher and Paul Dubois
and Conrad Hinson.
These were people that were on the main list.
And they were just asking for things like, hey, we really should have complex numbers
in this language.
So let's, you know, there's a J, there's a one J, right?
And the fact that they went the engineering route of J is interesting.
I don't think that's entirely favorite engineers.
I think it's because I is so often used as the index of a for loop.
I think that's actually why.
Probably.
I mean, there's a pragmatic aspect.
But the complex numbers were there.
I love that.
The fact that I could write in the array constructs and that reduction was there.
Very simple to write summations and broadcasting was there.
I could do addition of whole arrays.
So that was cool.
That was something that I loved about it.
I don't know what to start talking to you about because you've been, you've created
so many incredible projects that basically change the whole landscape of programming.
But okay, let's start with, let's go chronologically with SciPy.
You created SciPy over two decades ago now.
Yes.
Right.
I love to talk about SciPy.
SciPy was really my baby.
What is it?
Yeah.
What was its goal?
What is its goal?
How does it work?
Yeah.
Well, practically, here I am using Python to do stuff that I previously used Matlab
to use.
And I was using Numeric, which is an array library that made a lot of it possible.
But there's things that were missing.
Like I didn't have an ordinary differential equation solver I could just call.
I didn't have integration.
Yeah, I wanted to integrate this function.
Okay.
Well, I don't have just a function I can call to do that.
These are things I remember being critical things that I was missing.
Optimization.
I just want to pass a function to an optimizer and have it tell me what the optimum value
is.
Those things like, well, why don't we just write a library that adds these tools?
And I started to post on the main list and there had previously been, you know, people
have discussed.
I remember Conrad Hinson saying, wouldn't it be great if we had this optimizer library
or David Asch would say this stuff and I'm, you know, I'm a ambitious, ambitious is the
wrong word, an eager and probably more time than sense.
I was, you know, a poor graduate student.
My wife thinks I'm working on my PhD and I am, but part of the PhD that I loved was
the fact that it's exploratory, but you're not just, you know, taking orders fulfilling
a list of things to do.
You're trying to figure out what to do.
And so I thought, well, you know, I'm writing tools for my own use in a PhD.
So I'll just start this project.
And so in 99, 98 was when I first started to write libraries for Python, but when I fell
in love with Python 98, I said, Oh, well, there's just a few things missing.
Like, Oh, I need a reader to read daikon files that was in medical imaging and daikon was
a format that I want to be able to load that into Python.
Okay.
How do I write a reader for that?
So I wrote something called, it was an IO package, right?
And that was my very first extension module, which is C. So I wrote C code to extend Python
so that the positive in Python, I could write things more easily that, that combination
kind of hooked me.
It was the idea that I could, here's this powerful tool I can use as a scripting language
and a high level language to think about, but that I can extend easily, easily in this
in C that easily for me, because I knew enough C.
And then Guido had written a link, I mean, the only, the hard part of extending Python
was something called the way memory management networks, and you have to reference counting.
And so there's, there's a tracking of reference counting you have to do manually.
And if you don't, you have, you have memory leaks.
And so that's hard, plus then C, you know, it's just much more, you have to put more
effort into it.
It's not just I have to now think about pointers and I have to think about stuff that is different.
I have to kind of, you're like putting a new cartridge in your brain, like, okay, I'm
thinking about MRI, now I'm thinking about programming and, and they're distinct modules
you end up having to think about.
So it's harder when I was just in Python, I could just think about MRI and high level
writing.
But I could do that and that kind of, I liked it.
I found that to be enjoyable and fun.
And so I ended up, oh, well, let me just add a bunch of stuff to Python to do integration.
Well, and the cool thing is, is that, you know, the power of the internet, I just looking
around and I found, oh, there's this NetLib, which has hundreds of 4chan routines that people
are written in the 60s and the 70s and the 80s and 4chan 77, fortunately, it wasn't 4chan
60s, it had been imported to 4chan 77.
And 4chan 77 is actually a really great language.
4chan 90 probably is my favorite 4chan because it's also, it's got complex numbers, got arrays
and it's pretty high level.
Now, the problem with it is you'd never want to write a program in 4chan 90 or 4chan 77,
but it's totally fine to write a sub routine in, right?
And so, and then 4chan kind of got a little off course when they tried to compete with
C++, but at the time, I just want libraries that do something like, oh, here's an order
infrastructure equation, here's integration, here's runge cut integration, already done.
I don't have to think about that algorithm, I mean, you could, but it's nice to have somebody
who's already done one and tested it.
And so, I sort of started this journey in 98, really, look back at the main list, there's
sort of this, this productive era of me writing an extension module to connect runge cut integration
to Python and making an ordinary additional equation solver and then releasing that as
a package, so we could call ODE pack, I think I called it then quad pack, you know, I just
made these packages, eventually that became multi pack because they're originally modular,
you can install them separately, but a massive problem in Python was actually just getting
your stuff installed.
At the time, releasing software for me, like today it's, people think, what does that mean?
Well, then it meant some poorly written webpage, I had some bad webpage up and I put a tar
ball, just a GZip tar ball of source code, that was the release.
But okay, can we just stand that because that, the community aspect of creating the package
and sharing that, that's rare, that to have, to both have the, at that time, so like the
rust.
Yeah, it was pretty early, yeah.
Well, not rare, maybe you can correct me on this, but it seems like in the scientific
community, so many people, you were basically solving the problems you needed to solve,
to process the particular application, the data that you need, and to also have the mind
that I'm going to make this usable for others, that's...
I would say I was inspired, I'd been inspired by Linux, been inspired by, you know, Linus
and him making his code available, and I was starting to use Linux at the time, and I went,
this is cool.
So I'd kind of been previously primed that way, and generally, I was into science because
I like the sharing notion, I like the idea of, hey, let's, if collectively we build
knowledge and share it, we can all be better off.
Okay, so you want to energize by that idea?
So I was energized by that idea already, right, and I can't deny that I was, I'm sort of had
this very, I liked that part of science, that part of sharing, and then all of a sudden,
oh wait, here's something, and here's something I could do, and then I slowly over years learned
how to share better so that you could actually engage more people faster.
One of the key things was actually giving people a binary they could install, right,
so that wasn't just your source code, good luck.
Compile this and then...
It's compiled, ready to install, you just, you know, so, in fact, a lot of the journey
from 98, even through 2012 when I started Anaconda was about that, like it's why, you
know, it's really the key as to why a scientist with dreams of doing MRI research ended up
starting a software company that installs software.
I work with a few folks now that don't program, like on the creative side, the video side,
the audio side, and because my whole life is running on scripts, I have to try to get
them, I have now the task of teaching them how to do Python enough to run the scripts,
and so I've been actually facing this, whether it's on the condor, some, with the task of
how do I minimally explain, basically to my mom, how to write a Python script, and it's
an interesting challenge.
It's a to do item for me to figure out, like, what is the minimal amount of information
I have to teach, what are the tools you use, the one you enjoy it, to your effect of it.
And they're related.
Those are two related questions.
And then the debugging, like the iterative process of running the script to figure out
what the error is, maybe even for some people to do the fix yourself.
So do you compile it, like how do you distribute that code to them?
And it's interesting because I think it's exactly what you're talking about, if you
increase the circle of empathy, the circle of people that are able to use your programs,
you increase its effectiveness and its power.
And so you have to think, can I write scripts, can I write programs that can be used by medical
engineers, by all kinds of people that don't know programming, and actually maybe plant
the seed, have them catch the bug of programming so that they start on their journey.
That's a huge responsibility.
And ultimately it has to do with the Amazon one click buy, like how frictionless can you
make the early steps?
Frictionless is actually really key to go in any community is every, any friction point,
you're just going to lose, you're going to lose some people, right?
Now, sometimes you may want to intentionally do that, if you're early enough on that you
need a lot of help, you need people who have the skills, you might actually, it's helpful,
you don't necessarily have too many users as opposed to contributors if you're early
on.
Anyway, there's a sci fi start in 98, but it really emerged as this collection of modules
that I was just putting on the net, people were downloading, and you know, I think I
got 100 users by the end of that year, but the fact that I got 100 users and more than
that, people started to email me with fixes, like, and that was actually intoxicating,
right?
That was the, that was the, you know, here I'm writing papers and I'm giving conferences
and I get people would say hello, but yeah, good job, but mostly it was, you're reviewed
with it's competitive, right?
You publish a paper and people were like, oh, it wasn't my paper, you know, it was starting
to see that sense of academic life where it was so much, I thought it was a cooperative
effort, but it sounds like we're here just to one up each other.
And you know, that's not true across the board, but a lot of that's there, but here
in this world, I was getting responses from people all over the world.
You know, I remember P.R.
Peterson in Estonia, right, was one of the first people, and he sent me back this make
file because, you know, the first thing it is, yeah, you're building stinks and here's
a better make file.
Now, it was a complex make file, I don't think I never understood that make file actually,
but it worked and it did a lot more, and so I said, thanks, this is cool.
And that was my first kind of engagement with community development.
But you know, the process was he sent me a patch file, I had to upload a new tar ball,
and I just found I really love that.
And the style back then was here's a main list is very, it wasn't as, there's certainly
more of the tools that are available today, it was very early on, but I really started
to, that's the whole year, I think I did about seven packages that year, right?
And then by the end of the year, I collected them into a thing called multi pack.
So 99, there was this thing called multi pack, and that's when a high school student, always
a high school student at the time, getting Robert Kern, took that package and made a
Windows installer, right?
And then of course, a massive increase of usage.
So by the way, most of this development was under Linux.
Yes.
Yes, it was on Linux.
I was a Linux developer doing it on a new box.
I mean, at the time, I was actually getting into, I had a new hard drive, just some kernel
programming to make the hard drive work, I mean, not programming, but modification to
the kernel so I could actually hard drive working.
I love that aspect of it.
I was also in, at school, I was building a cluster, I took Mac computers, and you put
Yellow Dog Linux on them.
At the Mayo Clinic, they were just, all these Macs that were older, they were just getting
rid of, and so I kind of got permission to go grab them together, I put about 24 of them
together in a cluster, in a cabinet, and put Yellow Dog Linux on them all, and I wrote
a C++ program to do MRI simulation.
That was what I was doing at the same time for my day job, so to speak.
So I was loving the whole process, and at the same time, I was, oh, I need an ordinary
differential equation.
That's why ordinary differential equations were key, was because that's the heart of
a block equation for simulating MRI is an ODE solver, and so that's, I actually did that,
it doesn't happen at the same time.
That's why, kind of, what you're working on and what you're interested in, they're
coinciding.
I was definitely scratching my own itch, in terms of building stuff, which helped in
the sense that I was using it for me, so at least I had one user.
I had one person who was like, well, no, this is better, I like this interface better, and
I had the experience of Matlab to guide some of what those APIs might look like, but you
know, you're just doing yourself, you're building all this stuff.
But the Windows installer, it was the first time I realized, oh, yeah, the binary installer
really helps people.
And so that led to spending more time on that side of things.
So around 2000, so I graduated my PhD in 2000, end of year, end of 2000, so 99 doing a lot
of work there, 98 doing a lot of work there, 99 kind of spending more time on my PhD, helping
people use the tools, thinking about where do I want to go from here.
There was a company, there was a guy actually, Eric Jones and Travis Vott, they were two
friends who founded a company called Enthought, it's here in Austin, still here.
And they, Eric contacted me at the time when I was a graduate student still, and he said,
hey, why don't you come down, we want to build a company, you know, we're thinking of, you
know, a scientific company and we want to take what you're doing and kind of add it
to some stuff that he'd done, he'd written some tools, and then Piero Peterson had done
F2Py, let's come together and build, pull this all together and call it SciPy.
So that's the origin of the SciPy brand, it came from, you know, multi pack and a whole
bunch of modules I'd written, plus a few things from some other folks, and then pull
together in a single installer.
SciPy was really a distribution of Python masquerading as a library.
How did you think of all SciPy in context of Python, in context of numeric, like what?
We saw SciPy as a way to make an R&D environment for Python, like use Python, dependent on
numeric, so numeric was the array library we depended on, and then from there extend
it with a bunch of modules that allowed for, and at the time, the original vision of SciPy
was to have plotting, was to have, you know, replant, you know, the replant environment
and kind of a whole, really a whole data environment that you could then install and get going
with.
And that was kind of the thinking, it didn't really evolve that way, right?
It sort of had a, but one, it's really hard to do massive scale projects with open source
collectives.
Actually, there's sort of an intrinsic cooperation limit as to which, you know, too many cooks
in the kitchen, you know, you can do amazing infrastructure work, when it comes down to
bringing it all together into a single deliverable, that actually requires a little more product
management that is not, that doesn't really emerge from the same dynamic.
So it struggled, you know, struggled to get almost too many voices, it's hard to have
everybody agree, you know, consensus doesn't really work at that scale, you end up with
politics, you know, with the same kind of things that's happened in large organizations
trying to decide on what to do together.
The consensus building was still, was challenging at scale, as more people came in, right?
Early on, it's fine, because there's nobody there, and so it works, but then as you get
more successful, the more people use it, all of a sudden, oh, there's this scale at which
this doesn't work anymore, and we have to come up with different approaches.
So SciFi came out officially in 2001, was the first release, most of the time.
I remember the days of getting that release ready, it was a Windows installer, and there
were bugs on how, you know, the Windows compiler handled complex numbers, and you were chasing
segmentation faults, and it was, it's a lot of work, there's a lot of effort had nothing
to do with my area of study, and at the same time, I had just gotten an offer, so he wondered
if I wanted to come down and help him start that, you know, start that company with his
friend, and at the time I was like, I was intrigued, but I was squaring a path, an academic
path, and I just got an offer to go and teach at my alma mater, so I took that tenure track
position, and SciFi, and kind of, then I started working on SciFi as a professor, too.
Okay.
So that's, I left, I've got the Mayo Clinic graduate, wrote my thesis using SciFi, wrote,
you know, there's images that were created, now the plotting tool I used was something
from Yorick, actually, it was a plotting PLT, kind of a plotting language that I used.
Yorick is a programming language.
It was a programming language, it had a plotting tool, Dislin, it had integration to Dislin,
I ended up using Dislin, plus some of the plotting from Yorick, linked to from Python.
But it was a, people don't plot that way now, but this was before, and SciFi was trying
to add plotting, right?
It didn't have much success, really the success of plotting came from John Hunter, who had
a similar experience to my experience, my kind of Maverick experience as a person just
trying to get stuff done, and kind of having more time than money, maybe, right?
And John Hunter created what?
Mapplotlib.
He's a creator of Mapplotlib.
Yeah, so John Hunter was, you know, he wasn't a student at the time, but he was working
in Quantfield, and he said, we need better plotting.
So he just went out and said, cool, I'll make a new project, and we'll call it Mapplotlib.
And he released in 2001, about the same time that SciFi came out.
And it was separate library, separate install, use numeric, SciFi, use numeric.
And so SciFi, you know, in 2001, we released SciFi, and then Enthoc created a conference
called SciFi, which was brought people together to talk about the space.
And that conference is still ongoing, it's one of the favorite conferences of a lot of
people because it's, you know, it's changed over the years.
But early on, it was, you know, a collection of 50 people who care about scientists mostly,
you know, practicing scientists who want to care about coding and doing it well and not
using MATLAB.
And I remember being driven by, you know, I like MATLAB, but I didn't like the fact
that, like, so I'm not opposed to proprietary software.
I'm actually not an open source zealot.
I love open source for the, what it brings, but I also see the role for proprietary software.
But what I didn't like was the fact that I would develop code and publish it, and then
effectively telling somebody here to run my code, you have to have this proprietary software.
Right.
And there's also culture around MATLAB as much, because I've talked to a few folks
at MathWorks, Greats MATLAB.
Yeah.
I mean, there's just a culture, they try really hard, but it's just this corporate IBM
style culture that's like, or whatever.
I don't want to say negative things about IBM or whatever, but there's a, no, it's really
that connection.
It's something I'm in the middle of right now is the business of open source.
And how do you connect the ethos of cooperative development with the necessity of creating
profits?
Right.
And like right now today, you know, I'm still in the middle of that.
That's actually the early days of me exploring this question.
Because as I was writing SciPy, I mean, as an aside, I also had, so I had three kids
at the time.
I have six kids now.
I got married early, wanted a family.
I had three kids, and I remember reading, I read Richard Stallman's post, and I was
a fan of Stallman.
I would read his work, I liked this collective ideas he would have.
Certainly the ideas on IP law, I read a lot of stuff.
But then he said, you know, okay, well, how do I make money with this?
How do I make a living?
How do I pay for my kids?
All this stuff was in my mind.
Young graduate student making no money thinking I got to get a job.
And he said, well, you know, I think just be like me and don't have kids, right?
That's just don't, don't.
That's his take on, is that his dad?
That was the, that was the, what he said in that moment, right?
That's the thing I read and I went, okay, this is a train I can't get on.
There has to be a way to preserve the culture of open source and still be able to make sufficient
money to feed your kids.
Yes, exactly.
There's got to be, well, so that actually led me to a study of economics, because at
the time I was ignorant, and it really was, and I'm actually, I'm embarrassed for educational
system that they could let me, and I was valedictorian of my high school class, and I did super well
in college, and like academically I did great, right?
But the fact that I could do that and then be clueless about this key part of life, it
led me to go, there's a problem.
Like I should have learned this in fifth grade, I should have learned this in eighth
grade, like everybody should come out with a basic knowledge of economics.
You're an interesting example, because you've created tools that change the lives of probably
millions of people, and the fact that you don't understand at the time of the creation
of those tools, the basics economics of how to build up a giant system is a problem.
Yeah, it's a problem.
And so, during my PhD, at the same time, this is back in 98, 99, at the same time, I was
in a library, I was reading books on capitalism, I was reading books on Marxism, I was reading
books on, you know, what is this thing, what does it mean?
And I encountered a, basically what I, I encountered a set of writings from people that said they
were the inheritors of Adam Smith, but Adam Smith for the first time, right?
Which is the wealth of nations and kind of this notion of emergent, emergent societies,
and realized, oh, there's this whole world out here of people.
And the challenge of economics is also political, like, because economics, you know, people,
different parties running for office, they'll, they want their economic friends, they want
their economists to back them up, right, or to be their magicians, like the magicians
in Pharaoh's court, right, the people that are kind of say, hey, this is, you should
listen to me, because I've got the expert who says this.
And so, it gets really muddled, right?
I was looking at, as a scientist going, what is this space, what does this mean, how does
Paris get fed, how does, how does money, how does it work?
And I found a lot of writings I really loved.
I found some things that I really loved, and I learned from that, it was writings from
people like Von Missas, he wrote a, he wrote a paper in 1920 that still should be read
more than it is.
It's got, I mean, it was the economic calculation problem of the socialist commonwealth.
It was basically in response to the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917.
And his basic argument was, it's not going to work to not have private property.
You're not going to be able to come up with prices.
The bureaucrats aren't going to be able to determine how to allocate resources without
a price system.
And a price system emerges from people making trades.
And they can only make trades if they have authority over the thing they're trading.
And that, that creates information flow that you just don't have if you try to top down
it.
Right.
It's like, huh, that's a really good point.
Yeah.
The prices have a signal that's used, and it's important to have that signal when you're
trying to build a community of productive people like you would in the software engineering
space.
Yeah.
The prices are actually an important signaling mechanism, right?
And that money is just a bartering tool.
Right.
So this is the first time I've encountered any of this concept, right?
And the fact that, oh, this is actually really critical.
Like it's so critical to our prosperity and that we're, we're dangerously not learning
about this, not teaching our children about this.
So you had the three kids, they had to make some hard decisions.
They had to make some money, right, had to figure it out.
But I didn't really care.
I mean, I was never, I've never been driven by money.
Just need it.
Yeah.
Right.
You need to eat.
So what, how did that resolve itself in terms of side by?
So I would say it didn't really resolve itself.
It sort of started a journey that I'm continuing on.
I'm still on, I would say.
I don't think it resolved itself, but I will say I went in wide, eyes wide open.
Like I knew that there were problems with, you know, giving stuff away and creating the,
the market externalities, that the fact that, yeah, people might use it and I might not
get paid for it and I'll have to figure something else out to get paid.
Like at least I can say I'm not bitter that a lot of people have used stuff that I've
written and I haven't necessarily benefited economically from it.
Like I've heard other people be, you know, bitter about that when they write or they
talk, they go, oh, I should have got more value out of this.
And I'm also, I want to create systems that let people like me who might have these desires
to do things, let them benefit so that actually creates more of the same.
Not to turn on your bitterness module, but there's some aspect, I wish there was mechanisms
for me to reward whoever created side pie and non pie because it brought so much joy
into my life.
I appreciate that.
And I, the tip dark notion was there.
And I think there should be a very, there should be a machine less mechanism.
I totally agree.
I would love to talk about some of the ideas I have because I actually came across, I think
I've come up with some interesting notions that could work, but they'll require anything
that will work takes time to emerge.
Right.
And I don't just turn overnight.
That's definitely one thing I've also understood and learned is any fixes.
That's why it's kind of funny.
We often give credit to, you know, oh, this president gets elected and, oh, look how great
things have done.
And I saw that when, when I had a transition in a condo, when a new CEO came in, right?
And it's like the success that's happening.
There's an inertia there.
Yeah.
Right.
And sometimes the decision made like 10 years before is the reason why the success is
the.
Right.
Exactly.
So we're sort of just one around taking credit for stuff.
Credit assignment has like a delay to it.
Yes.
That makes the credit assignment basically wrong more than right.
Wrong more than right.
Exactly.
And so I'm like, oh, this is, you know, that's the stuff I would, I would read a ton about,
you know, early on.
So I don't, I feel like I'm with you.
Like I want the same thing.
I want to be able to, and honestly not for personally, I've been happy.
I've been, I've been happy.
I feel like I don't have any, I mean, we've been done reasonably okay, but I've had to
pursue it.
Like that's, that's really what started my trajectory from academia is reading that
stuff led me to say, oh, entrepreneurship matters.
So I love software, but we need more entrepreneurs and I want to understand that better.
So once I kind of had that, that virus infect my brain, it, even though I was on a trajectory
to go to a tenure track position at a university and I was there for six years, I was kind
of already out the door when I started and we can get into that.
Yeah, what can I just ask a quick question on, is there some design principles that were
in your mind or on side pie?
Like, is there some key ideas that were just like sticking to you that this is, this is
the fundamental ideas?
Yeah, I would say so.
I would think it's basically accessibility to scientists, like give them, give scientists
and engineers tools that they don't have to think a lot about programming.
So give them really good building blocks, give them functions that they want to call
and sort of just the right length of spelling.
You know, there's a one tradition in a programming where it's like, you know, make very, very
long names, right?
And you can see it in some programming languages where the names get, you know, take half the
screen and I, and in the fortune world, characters would have to be six, six letters early on,
right?
And that's way too, too much, too, too little, but I was like, I like to have names that
were informative, but short.
So even though Python was a different conversation, but documentation is doing so well.
There's some work there.
So when you look at great scientific libraries and functions, there's, there's a richness
of documentation that helps you get into the details.
The first glance at a function gives you the intuition of all it needs to do by looking
at the headers and so on.
But to get the depths of all the complexities involved, all the options involved, documentation
does some of the work.
Documentation is essential.
Yeah.
So that was actually, so we thought about several things.
One is we wanted plotting.
We wanted interactive environment.
We wanted good documentation.
These were things we knew, we wanted.
The reality is those took about 10 years to evolve, right?
Given the fact that we didn't have a big budget, it was all volunteer labor.
It was sort of when Enthought got created and they started to, you know, try to find projects,
people would pay for pieces and they were able to fund some of it, not nearly enough
to keep up with what was necessary.
And I'm, no, no criticism, just simply the reality.
I mean, it's, it's hard to start a business and then do consulting and then also promote
an open source project that's still fairly new.
Cypher was fairly niche.
We stayed connected all while I was a student, sorry, a professor.
I went to BYU and started to teach, electrical engineering, all the applied math courses.
I loved teaching, single processing, probability theory, electrical magnetism.
I was the, if you look at right in my professor, which my kids loved to do, I wasn't, I got
some bad reviews because people.
What was the criticism?
I would speak too high, too high of a level.
Like I definitely had a calibration problem coming out of graduate work where I hate to
be condescending to people.
Like I really have a ton of respect for people fundamentally.
Like my fundamental thing is I respect people.
Sometimes that can lead to a, I was, I was thinking they were, they, they had more knowledge
than they did.
And so I would just speak at a very high level, assume they got it.
But they need to rise to the standard that you set.
I mean, that's one of the, some of the greatest teachers do that.
And I agree, and that was kind of what was inspiring me, but, but you know, you also have to, I
cannot say I was an art, I was articulate of some of the greatest teachers, right?
I was, you know, like one, one classic example, when I first taught at BYU, my very first
class, it was overheads, transparencies, overheads, before projectors were really that common.
So transparencies, I'm writing my notes out, I go in, rooms half dark, I just blaring through
these transparencies.
Here it is.
And I did, gave a quiz after two weeks, nowhere knew anything, nothing I had taught, I had
gotten anywhere.
And I realized, okay, I'm not, this is not working.
So I took, put away the transparencies and I turned around and just started using the
chalkboard.
And what it did is it slowed me down, right?
The chalkboard just slowed me down and gave people time to process and to think and then
that made me focus.
My writing wasn't great on their chalkboard, but I really loved that part of like the teaching.
So that, that entered sci pies world in terms of, we always understood that sci, there's
a didactic aspect of sci pie kind of, how do you take the knowledge and then produce
it?
The challenge we had was the scope.
Like ultimately sci pie was everything, right?
And so 2001 when it first came out, people were starting to use it.
No, this is cool.
This is a tool we actually use.
At the same time, 2001 timeframe, there was a little bit of like the Hubble Space Telescope,
the folks at Hubble has started to say, hey, Python, we're going to use Python for processing
images from Hubble.
And so Perry Greenfield was a good friend and running that program and he had called me
before I left to BYU and said, you know, we want to do this, but numeric actually has
some challenges in terms of, you know, it's not, the array doesn't have enough types.
We need more operations, you know, broadcast needs to be a little more settled.
They wanted record arrays.
They wanted, you know, record arrays are like a data frame, but a little bit different,
but they want a more structured data.
So he had called me even early on then and they said, yeah, would you want to work on
something to make this work?
And I said, yeah, I'm interested, but I'm going here and we'll see if I have time.
So in the meantime, while I was teaching and SIPI was emerging and I had a student, I was
constantly while I was teaching trying to figure a way to fund this stuff.
So I had a graduate student, my only graduate student, a Chinese fellow, Lu Hongze is his
name, great guy.
He wrote a bunch of stuff for iterative linear algebra, like got into writing some of the
iterative linear algebra tools that are currently there in SIPI and they've gotten better since,
but this is in 2005, kept working on SIPI.
But Perry has started working on a replacement to Numeric called Numeray and in 2004, a package
called and the image, it was an image processing library that was written for Numeray.
And it had in it a morphology tool.
I don't know if you know what morphology is.
It's open dilations.
You know, there was sort of this, as a medical imaging student, I knew what it was because
it was used in segmentation a lot.
And in fact, I'd wanted to do something like that in Python in SIPI, but just had never
gotten around to it.
So when it came out that it worked only on Numeray and SIPI needed Numeric and so we
effectively had the beginning of this split and Numeric and Numeray didn't share data.
They were just two, so you could have a gigabyte of Numeray data and gigabyte of Numeric data
and they wouldn't share it.
And so you had these, then you had these scientific libraries written on top.
I got really bugged by that.
I got really like, oh man, this is not good.
We're not cooperating now.
We're sort of redoing each other's work and we're just this young community.
So that's what led me, even though I knew it was risky because my, I was on a tenure
track position.
2004, I got reviewed.
They said, hey, things are going okay.
You're doing well.
Paper's coming out.
But you're kind of spending a lot of time on this open source stuff.
Maybe do a little less of that and a little more of the paper writing and grant writing,
which was naive, but it was definitely the tie, the thinking that still goes on, still
goes on.
You're basically creating a thing which enables science in the 21st century.
Maybe don't emphasize that so much in your tenure.
Right.
It illustrates some of the challenges.
It does.
And it's, people mean well, but we've gotten broken in a bunch of ways.
Certain things, a programming, understanding the role of software engineering, programming
in society is a little bit like, I guess.
Exactly.
Now I was in an electrical engineering position.
Right.
Yeah, of course.
There.
Yeah.
They were very focused.
And so, good people, and I had a great time.
I loved my time.
I loved my teaching.
I loved all the things I did there.
The problem was, this split was happening, this community I loved.
I saw people and I went, oh my gosh, this is going to be, this is not great.
And so, I happened, fate, I had a class I signed up for, I was trying to build an MRI system.
But I had a kind of a radio, a digital radio class, a digital MRI class.
And I had people sign up, two people signed up, then they dropped, and so, I had nobody
in this class.
So, and I didn't have any other courses to teach, and I thought, oh, I've got some time.
And I'll just write, I'll just write a merger of numeric and nummery.
Like I'll basically take the numeric code base at the features nummery I was adding,
and then kind of come up with a single array library that everybody can use.
So that's where NumPy came from, was my thinking, hey, I can do this, and who else is going
to?
Because at that point, I'd been around the community long enough, and I'd written enough
C code.
I knew, I knew the structures.
And I, in fact, my first contribution to numeric had been writing the CAPI documentation that
went in the first documentation for NumPy, for numeric, sorry.
This is Paul de Bois, David Asher, Conrad Henson and myself.
I got credit because I wrote this chapter, which is all the CAPI of numeric, all the
C stuff.
So I said, ah, probably the one to do it, and nobody else is going to do this.
So it's sort of out of a sense of duty and passion, knowing that I don't think my academic,
I don't think the department here is going to appreciate this, but it's the right thing
to do.
Can we just link on that moment because the importance of the way you thought and the
action you took, I feel is understated and is rare, and I would love to see so much more
of it because what happens as the tools become more popular, there's a split that happens.
And it's a truly heroic and impactful action to in those early, in that early split to
step up and you, it's like great leaders throughout history, like get what is the brave heart,
like get on a horse and, and rile the troops because I think that can have, make a big
difference.
We have TensorFlow versus PyTorch in the machine learning.
We have the same problem today.
Yeah.
I wonder, it's actually bigger.
I wonder if it's possible in the early days to rally the troops.
It is possible, especially in the early days.
The longer it goes, the harder, right?
And the more energy in the factions, the harder, but in the early days, it is possible and it's
extremely helpful and there's a willingness there, but, but the, but the challenge is
there's usually not a willingness to fund it.
There's not a willingness to, you know, like I was literally walking into a field saying
I'm going to do this and you know, here I am, like, you know, I have five kids at home
now.
Pressure builds.
Sometimes my wife hears these stories and she's like, you did what?
I thought we were going to, I thought you were actually on a path to make sure we had
resources and money, but, but again, there's a, there's an aspect, I'm, I'm a very hopeful
person.
I'm an optimistic person.
My nature.
I love people.
I learned that about myself later on, uh, uh, part of my, uh, my religious beliefs actually
lead to that.
And it's why I hold them dear because it's actually how I feel about, it's what, it's
what leads me to this, to these attitudes, sort of this hopefulness and this sense of,
yeah, it may not, it may not work out for me financially or maybe, but that's not the
ultimate gain.
Like that's a thing, but it's not, you know, that's not the scorecard, uh, for me.
And so I just wanted to be helpful and I knew, and partly because these sci pi conferences
because of the main list conversations, I knew there was a lot of need for this.
Right.
And so I had this, it wasn't like I was alone in terms of no feedback.
I had these people who knew, but it was crazy.
Like people who, to the time said, yeah, we didn't think you'd be able to do it.
Yeah.
We thought it was crazy.
And also instructive, like practically speaking, that you had a cool feature that you were
chasing in the morphology, like the, like it's, it's not just like, it's not some visionary
thing.
I'm going to unite the community.
You were like, you were actually practically, this is what one person actually can do, uh,
and actually build.
Cause that is important cause you can get over your skis.
Yeah.
You can definitely get over your skis.
And I had, in fact, this almost got me over my skis, right?
I would say, well, in retrospect, I hate looking back, we can, I can tell you all the flaws
with NumPy.
Right.
We want to go into it.
There's lots of stuff that I'm like, oh man, that's embarrassing.
That was wrong.
I wish I had somebody slot me with a wet fish there.
Yeah.
Like I needed, like what I'd wished I'd had was somebody with more experience and certainly
library writing and array library.
Like I wish I had me, I could go back in time and go, do this, do that.
There's an important thing.
Cause there's things we did that are still there that are problematic that created challenges
for later.
And, and I didn't know it at the time, didn't understand how important that was.
And in many cases, didn't know what to do.
Like there was pieces of the design of NumPy.
I didn't know what to do until five years ago.
Now I know what they should have been, but I didn't know at the time and nobody, and
I couldn't get the help.
Anyway.
So I wrote it.
It took about, it took four months to write the first version and then about 14 months
to make it usable.
But it was, it wasn't, it was that first four months of intense writing, coding, getting
something out the door that worked.
That was, it was, it was definitely challenging.
And then the big thing I did was create a new type object called D type.
That was probably the sync, the, the contribution.
And then the fact that I added a broad, not just broadcasting, but advanced indexing.
So that you could do, um, masked indexing and indirect indexing instead of just slicing
in.
So for people who don't know, and maybe you can elaborate NumPy, I guess the vision in
the narrowest sense is to have this object that represents n dimensional arrays.
And like at any level of abstraction you want, but basically it could be a black box that
you can investigate in ways that you would naturally want to investigate such objects.
Yes.
Exactly.
So you could do math on it easily.
Math on it easily.
Yeah.
So it had an associated library of math operations.
And effectively SciPy became an even larger operate set of math operations.
So the key for me was I was going to write NumPy and then move SciPy to depend on NumPy.
In fact, early on, one of the initial proposals was that we would just write SciPy and it would
have the numeric object inside of it and it'd be SciPy dot array or something.
That turned out to be problematic because numeric already had a little mini library of linear
algebra and some functions and it had enough momentum, enough users that nobody wanted
to...
They wanted the backward compatibility.
One of the big challenges of NumPy was I had to be backward compatible with both numeric
and numeric in order to allow both of those communities to come together.
There was a ton of work in creating that backward compatibility that also created echoes in
today's object.
Like some of the complexity in today's object is actually from that goal of backward compatibility
to these other communities, which if you didn't have that, you'd do something different,
which is instructive because a lot of things are there.
You think, what is that there for?
It's like, well, it's a remnant, it's an artifact of its historical existence.
By the way, I love the empathy and the lack of ego behind that because I feel...
You see that in the split, in the JavaScript frameworks, for example, the arbitrary branching.
I think in order to unite people, you have to kind of put your ego aside and truly listen
to others.
You do.
What do you love about Numeric?
What do you love about numeric?
Actually get a sense.
I was talking about languages earlier, sort of empathize to the culture of the people
that love something about this particular API, the naming style, or the usage patterns,
and truly understand them so that you can create that same draw in the united thing.
I completely agree.
You have to also have enough passion that you'll do it.
It can't be just like a perfunctory, oh yes, I'm really illicit to you, and then I'm not
really that excited about it.
So it really is an aspect, it's a philosophical, like there's a filia, there's a love of esteeming
of others that's actually at the heart of what is sort of a life philosophy for me,
right, that I'm constantly pursuing, and that helped, absolutely helped.
Makes me wonder in a philosophical, like looking at human civilization as one object, it makes
me wonder how we can copy and paste Travis's in the story.
Well, in some aspects, maybe.
Some aspects, right, right, exactly.
Well, it's a good question, how do we teach this, how do we encourage it, how do we lift
it?
Because so much of the software world, it's giant communities, right, but it seems like
so much is moved by little individuals.
You talk about Linus Tarvald, it's like, could you have had Linux without him?
Could you?
Yeah, Guido and Python.
Guido and Python.
I mean, in the scipy community in particular, I said we wanted to build this big thing,
but ultimately we didn't, what happened is we had Mavericks and champions like John Hunter
who created Map.lib, we had Fernando Perez who created iPython, and so we sort of inspired
each other, but in the credit, there's sort of a culture of this selfless, giving the
stewardship mentality, as opposed to ownership mentality, but stewardship and community focused,
community focused, but intentional work, like not waiting for everybody else to do the work,
but you're doing it for the benefit of others and not worried about what you're going to
get.
You're not worried about the credit, you're not worried about what you're going to get,
you're worried about, I later realized that I have to worry a little about credit, not
because I want the credit, because I want people to understand what led to the results.
It's not about me, it's I want to understand this is what led to the result, so I think
doing, and this is what had no impact on the result, like let's promote, this is just like
you said, I want to promote the attributes that help make us better off.
How do we make more of West McKinney, like West McKinney was critical to the success
of Python because of his creation of pandas, which is the roots of that, we're all the
way back in American num array and NumPy, where NumPy created an array of records, West started
to use that almost like a data frame, except it's an array of records, and data frame,
the challenge is, okay, if you want to augment it at another column, you have to insert, you
have to do all this memory movement to insert a column, whereas data frames became, oh, I'm
going to have a loose collection of arrays, so it's a record of arrays that is the heart
of a data frame.
And we thought about that back in the memory days, but West ended up doing the work to
build it, and then also the operations that were relevant for data processing.
What I noticed is just that each of these little things creates just another tick, another
up, so NumPy ultimately took a little while, about six months in, people started joining
me, Francesc Alted, Robert Kern, Charles Harris, and these people are many of the unsung
heroes, I would say.
People who are, they sometimes don't get the credit they deserve, because they were critical
both to support, it's hard and you need some support, people need support, and I needed
just encouragement, and they were helping, encouraged by contributing.
And once, the big thing for me was when John Hunter, he had previously done kind of a simple
thing called numerics to kind of, you know, between numeric and nummery, he had a little
high level tool that would just select each one for Matplotlib.
In 2006, he finally said, we're going to just make NumPy the dependency of Matplotlib.
As soon as he did that, and I remember specifically when he did that, I said, okay, we've done
it.
Like, that was when I knew we had to see success.
Before then, it was still, you know, doing sure, but that kind of started a roller coaster
and then 2006 to 2009, and then I've been floored by what it's done.
Like, I knew it would help, I had no idea how much it would help, right.
And it has to do with, again, the language thing, it just, people started to think in
terms of NumPy.
And that opened up a whole new way of thinking.
And part of the story that you kind of mentioned, but maybe you can elaborate, it seems like
at some point in this story, Python took over science and data science, and not bigger
than that, the scientific community started to think like programmers or started to utilize
the tools of computers to do, like at a scale that wasn't done with Fortran, like at this
gigantic scale, they started to opening their heart, and then Python was the thing.
I mean, there's a few other competitors, I guess, but Python, I think, really, really
took over.
I agree.
There's a lot of stories here that are kind of during this journey, because this is sort
of the start of this journey in 2005, 2006.
So my tenure committee, I applied for tenure in 2006, 2007, it came back, I split the department.
I was very polarizing.
I had some huge fans, and then some people said, no way, right.
So it was very, I was a polarizing figure in the department.
It went all the way up to the university president.
Ultimately, my department chair had this way, and they didn't say no, they said, come back
in two years and do it again.
And I went, at that point, I was like, I had this interest in entrepreneurship, this interest
in not the academic circles, not the, like, how do we make industry work?
So I do have to give credit to that exploration of economics, because that led me, oh, I had
a lot of opinions, I was actually very libertarian at the time.
And I still have some libertarian trends, but I'm more of a, I'm more of a collectivist
libertarian.
So you value broadly, philosophically, freedom?
Value broadly, philosophically, freedom, but I also understand the power of communities,
like the power of collective behavior.
And so what's that balance, right, that makes sense?
So by the time I was just, I got to go out and explore this entrepreneurial world.
When I left academia, I said, no thanks, called my friend, Eric, here, who had, his company
was going, I said, hey, could I join you and start this trend?
And he, at that time, they were usually inspired by a lot, they were trying to get clients,
and so I came down to Texas.
And in Texas is where I sort of, it's my entrepreneur world, right?
I left academia and went to entrepreneur world in 2007.
So moved here in 2007, kind of took a leap, knew nothing really about business, knew nothing
about a lot of stuff there.
There's, you know, for a long time, I've kept some connections to a lot of academics, because
I still value it.
I still love the scientific tradition, I still value the essence and the soul and the heart
of what is possible.
Don't like a lot of the administration and the kind of, we can go into detail about why
and where and how this happens, what are the challenges?
I mean, I don't know, but I'm with you, so I'm still affiliated with MIT, I still love
MIT, because there's magic there, and there's people I talk to, like researchers, faculty,
in those conversations and the white board and just the conversation, that's magic there.
All the other stuff, the administration, all that kind of stuff, seems to, you don't want
to say too harshly criticized sort of bureaucracies, but there's a lag that seems to get in the
way of the magic.
And I don't, I'm still have a lot of hope that that can change, because I don't often
see that particular type of magic elsewhere in the industry.
So like we need that, and we need that flame going, and it's the same thing as exactly
as you said, it has the same kind of elements like the open source community does.
But then if you, like the reason I stepped away, the reason I'm here, just like you did
in Austin is like, if I want to build one robot, I'll stay at MIT, but if I want to
build millions and make money enough to work and explore the magic of that, then you can't.
And I think that dance is...
The translational dance has been lost a bit, and there's a lot of reasons for that.
I'm certainly not an expert on this stuff, I can opine like anybody else, but I realized
that I wanted to explore entrepreneurship, and really figure out, and it's been a driving
passion for 20 years, 20, 25 years, how do we connect capital markets and company, because
again, I fell in love with the notion, oh, profit seeking on its own is not a bad thing.
It's actually a coordination mechanism for allocating resources that in an emergent way,
that respects everybody's opinions.
So this is actually powerful.
So I say all the time, when I make a company and we do something that makes profit, what
we're saying is, hey, we're collecting of the world's resources and voluntarily people
are asking us to do something that they like, and that's a huge deal.
And so I really liked that energy, so that's what I came to do and to learn and to try
to figure out.
I've been kind of stumbling through for the past 14 years.
And that's 2007.
2007, yeah.
And so you were still working on an opine.
So no pie was just emerging, right?
Just emerging.
One of the things I'd done, it's worth mentioning because it emphasized the exploratory nature
of my thinking at the time.
I said, well, I don't know how to fund this thing.
I've got a graduate student I'm paying for, and I've got no funding for him.
And I had done some fundraising from the public to try to get public fundraising from my lab.
I didn't really want to go out and just do the fundraising circuit the way it's traditionally
done.
So I wrote a book, and I said, I'm going to write a book, and I'm going to charge for
it.
It was called Guide to NumPy.
And so ultimately NumPy became documentation driven development because I basically wrote
the book and made sure the stuff worked, so the book would work.
So it really helped actually make NumPy become a thing.
So writing that book, and it was not a page turner, Guide to NumPy is not a book you pick
up and go, oh, this is great, over the fire.
But it's where you could find the details, like how did all this work?
And a lot of people love that book.
And so a lot of people ended up, but I said, look, I need to, so I'm going to charge for
it.
And I got some flak for that, not that much.
Just probably five angry messages, people yelling at me saying I was a bad guy for charging
for this book.
It was one of them which is dumb.
I'm just kidding.
No, I haven't really had any interaction with him personally, like I said.
But there were a few, but I'm just surprisingly not, there were actually a lot of people
like, no, it's fine.
You can charge for a book.
That's no big deal.
That's the way you can try to make money around open source.
So what I did, what I did in an interesting way, I said, well, you know, kind of my idea
is around IP law and stuff.
I love the idea.
You can share something.
You can spread it.
Like once it's, the fact that you have a thing and copying is free, but the creation
is not free.
So how do we, how do you fund the creation and allow the copying, right?
And the software is a little more complicated than that because creation is actually a continuous
thing.
You know, it's not like you build a widget that's done, it's sort of a process of emerging
and continuing to create.
But I wrote the book and had this market determined price thing.
I said, look, I need, I think I said 250,000.
If I make 250,000 from this book, it's, it'll, I'll make it free.
So as soon as I get that much money, or I said five years, right?
So there's a time limit.
Like forever.
Cool.
I didn't know this story.
Yeah.
So I released it on this.
And it's actually interesting because one of the people who also thought that was interesting
ended up being Chris White, who was the director of DARPA project that we got funding
through at Anaconda, and the reason he even called us back is because he remembered my
name from this book and he thought that was interesting.
And so even though we hadn't gone to the demo days, we applied and the people said, yeah,
nobody ever gets this without coming to the demo day first.
It's the first time I've seen it, but it's because I knew, you know, Chris had done this
and had this interaction.
So it did have impact.
I was actually really, really pleased by the result.
I mean, I ended up, I ended up in three years, I mean, 90,000.
So sold 30,000 copies by myself.
I just put it up on, you know, used PayPal and sold it.
And those are my first tastes of kind of, okay, this can work to some degree.
And I, you know, all over the world, right?
From Germany to Japan to, it was actually, it did work.
And so I appreciated the fact that PayPal existed and had a way to make, to get the money.
The distribution was simple.
This is pre Amazon book stuff.
So it was just publishing a website.
It was the popularity of sci fi emerging and getting company usage.
I ended up not letting it go the five years and not trying to make the full amount because,
you know, a year and a half later, I was at Enthought.
I had left academia as an Enthought and I kind of had a full time job.
And then actually what happened is the documentation people, there's a group that said, hey, we
want to do documentation for sci fi as a collective.
And they were essentially needing the stuff in the book.
Right.
And so they kind of asked, hey, can we just use the stuff in your book?
And at that point I said, yeah, I'll just open it up.
So that's, but it has served its purpose.
And the money that I made actually funded my grad student.
Like it was actually, you know, I paid him $25,000 a year out of that money.
The funny thing is if you do a very similar kind of experiment now with NumPy or something
like it, you could probably make a lot more.
It's probably true.
Because of the tooling and the community building.
Yeah, I agree.
Like the, and social media, there's just a virality to that kind of idea.
I agree.
There'd be things to do.
I've thought about that.
I really had thought about a couple of books or a couple of things that could be done there.
And I just haven't, right?
I even, I tried to hire a ghostwriter this year too to speak if I could help, but it
didn't.
Part of my problem is this, I've been so excited by a number of things that stemmed
in from that.
Like, so I came here, worked at and thought for four years, graciously, you know, Eric
made me president and we started to work closely together.
We actually helped him buy out his partner.
It didn't end great.
Like unfortunately Eric and I aren't friends now.
I still respect him.
I have a lot, you know, I wish we were, but he didn't like the fact that Peter and I
started Anaconda.
Right?
That was not, I mean, so there's two sides of that story, so I'm not going to go into
it, right?
Sure.
But you, as human beings and you wish you still could be friends.
I do.
It saddens me.
I mean, that's a story of great minds building great companies.
Somehow it's sad that when there's that kind of...
And I hold him in esteem.
I'm grateful for him.
I think they're doing, you know, their thoughts still exist.
They're doing great work helping scientists.
They still run the SciPy conference.
They're in the, they have an R&D platform they're selling now that's a tool that you
can go get today, right?
So they've been, Enthought has played a role in the SciPy, in supporting the community
around SciPy, I would say.
They ended up not being able to, they ended up building a tool suite to write GUI applications.
Like that's where they could actually make that the business could work.
And so the supporting SciPy and NumPy itself wasn't as possible.
Like they didn't, they try.
I mean, it was not just because, it was just because the business aspect.
So, and then I wanted to build a company that could do, that could get venture funding,
right?
Better for worse.
I mean, that's a longer story.
We could talk a lot about that, but.
And that's, that's where Anaconda came to be.
That's where Anaconda came to be.
So let me, let me ask you, it's a little bit for fun because you built this amazing thing.
And so let's, let's talk about like an old warrior looking over old battles.
You've, you know, there's a sad letter in 2012 that you wrote to the NumPy mailing list
the knowledge that you're leaving NumPy and some of the things you've listed and some,
some of the things you regret or not regret necessarily, but some things to think about.
If you could go back and you could fix stuff about NumPy or both sort of in a personal
level, but also like looking forward, what kind of things would you like to see changed?
Good questions.
So I think there's technical questions and social questions right there.
First of all, you know, I wrote NumPy as a service and I spent a lot of time doing it
and then other people came help make it happen.
NumPy succeeded because of the work of a lot of people, right?
So it's, it's important to be able to understand that I'm grateful for the opportunity at the
role I had, I could play and grateful that things I did had an impact, but they only
had the impact they had because the other people that came to the, to the story.
And so they were essential, but the way data types were handled, the way data types we
had array scalars, for example, that are really just a substitute for a type concept, right?
So we had array scalars or actual Python objects so that there's for every, for a 32 bit float
or a 16 bit float or a 16 bit integer, Python doesn't have a natural, it's just a one integer
has one float.
Well, what about these lower precision types, these larger precision types?
So we had them in NumPy so that you could have a collection of them, but then have an object
in Python that was one of them.
And there's questions about like in retrospect, I wouldn't have created those of an improved
the type system and like made the type system actually a Python type system, as opposed
to currently it's a Python one level type system.
I don't know if you know the difference between Python one, Python two, it's kind of technical
kind of depth, but Python two, one of its big things that Guido did, it was really brilliant.
It was he actually Python one, all classes, new objects were, were one.
So he was a user wrote a class.
It was an instance of a single Python type called the, called the class type, right?
In Python two, he used a meta typing hook to actually go, oh, we can extend this and have
users write classes that are new types.
So he was able to have your user classes be actual types and the Python type system got
a lot more rich.
I barely understood that at the time that NumPy was written.
And so I essentially in Python and NumPy created a type system that was Python one era.
It was every, every D type is an instance of the same type, as opposed to having new
D types be really just Python types with additional metadata.
What's the cost of that?
Is it efficiencies or usability?
It's usability primarily.
The cost isn't really efficiency.
It's the fact that it's clumsy to create new types.
It's hard.
And then one of the challenges you want to create new types, you want to quaternion type
or you want to add a new, you know, posit type or you want to.
So it's hard.
Now in the, and now if we had done that well, when NumPy came on the scene where we could
actually compile Python code, it would integrate with that type system much cleaner.
And now all of a sudden you could do gradual typing more easily.
You could actually have Python when you add NumPy plus better typing, could actually be
a, you'd smooth out a lot of rough edges.
But there's already, there's like, but are you talking about from the perspective of
developers within NumPy or users of NumPy?
Developers of new, not really users of NumPy so much.
It's the development of NumPy.
So you're thinking about like how to design NumPy so that it's contributors.
Yeah.
The contributors, it's easier.
It's easier.
It's less work to make it better and to keep it maintained.
And where that's impacted things, for example, is the GPU, like all of a sudden GPUs start
getting added and we don't have them in NumPy.
Like NumPy should just work on GPUs.
The fact that we have to, you'd have to download a whole other object called Koopi to have arrays
on GPUs is just an artifact of history.
Like there's no, there's no fundamental reason for it.
Well, that's really interesting if we could sort of go on that tangent briefly is you have
PyTorch and other library like TensorFlow that basically tried to mimic NumPy.
Yeah.
Like you've created a sort of platonic form of multi dimension.
Exactly.
Well, and the problem was they didn't realize that.
There were a lot of edges.
They were like, well, we should cut those out before we present it.
So I mean, I wonder if you can comment, is there like a difference between their implementations?
Do you wish that they were all using NumPy over, like in this abstraction on GPU?
And sorry to interrupt it, that there's GPUs, ASICs.
There might be other neuromorphic computing.
There might be other kind of, or the aliens will come with a new kind of computer, like
an abstraction that NumPy should just operate nicely over the things that are more and more
and smarter and smarter with this multi dimensional arrays.
Yeah.
There's several comments there.
We are working on something now called data dash apis.org, data dash api.org.
You can go there today.
And it's our answer.
It's my answer.
You know, it's not just me.
It's me and Rolf and Athen and Aaron and a lot of companies are helping us at Quonsite
Labs.
It's not unifying all the arrays, it's creating an API that is unified.
So we do care about this and we're trying to work through it.
I actually had the chance to go and meet with the TensorFlow team and the PyTorch team and
talk to them after exiting Anaconda, just talking about, because the first year after
leaving Anaconda in 2018, I became deeply aware of this and realized that, oh, the split
in the array community that exists today makes what I was concerned about in 2005 pretty
parochial.
It's a lot worse.
Right?
It's a lot worse than people, so perhaps the industry can sustain more stacks, right?
There's a lot of money, but it makes it a lot less efficient.
I mean, I've also learned to appreciate, it's okay to have some competitions, okay to have
different implementations, but it's better if you can at least refactor some parts.
I mean, you're going to have more efficient if you can refactor parts.
It's nice to have competition over things, over what it's nice to have competition.
They're innovative.
Yeah, innovative.
And then maybe on the infrastructure, whatever, however you define infrastructure, maybe it's
nice to have competition together.
Exactly.
I agree.
And I think, but it was interesting to hear the stories.
I mean, TensorFlow came out of the C++ library.
Jeff Dean wrote, I think, that was basically how they were doing inference, right?
And then they realized, oh, we could do this TensorFlow thing.
That C++ library, then what was interesting to me was the fact that both Google and Facebook
did not, it's not like they supported Python or NumPy initially, they just realized they
had to.
They came to this world and then all the users were like, hey, where's the NumPy interface?
Oh, and then they kind of came late to it and then they had these bolt ons.
TensorFlow's bolt on, I don't mean to offend, but it was so bad.
It's the first time that I'm usually, I mean, one of the challenges I have is I don't criticize
enough because in the sense that I don't give people input enough.
I think it's universally agreed upon that the bolt ons on TensorFlow work.
But I went to it.
It was a talk given at a Py...
My Orca in Spain and a guy, great guy, came and gave a talk and I said, you should never
show that IPI again at a PyData conference.
That was terrible.
You're taking this beautiful system we've created and you're corrupting all these poor
Python people, forcing them to write code like that or thinking they should.
Fortunately, they adopted Keras as their, and Keras is better.
And so Keras, TensorFlow is fine, is reasonable, but they bolted it on.
Facebook did too.
Facebook had their own C++ library for doing inference and they also had the same reaction.
They had to do this.
One big difference is Facebook, maybe because of the way it's situated in part of FAIR, part
of their research library, TensorFlow is definitely used and they couldn't just open it up and
let the community change what that is because I guess they were worried about disrupting
their operations.
Facebook's been much more open to having community input on the structure itself, whereas Google
and TensorFlow, they're really eager to have community users.
People use it and build the infrastructure, but it's much more walled.
It's harder to become a contributor to TensorFlow itself.
And it's also, this is a very difficult question to answer and don't mean to be throwing shade
at anybody, but you have to wonder, it's the Microsoft question of when you have a tool
like PyTorch or TensorFlow, how much are you tending to the hackers and how much are you
tending to the big corporate clients?
Correct.
Do you tend to the millions of people that are giving you almost no money, or do you tend
to the few that are giving you a ton of money?
I tend to stand with the people.
I feel like if you nurture the hackers, you will make the right decisions in the long
term that will make the companies happy.
I lean that way too.
I totally agree.
But then you have to find the right dance.
But it's a balance, because you can lean to the hackers and run out of money.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
Which has been some of the challenge I've faced in the sense that I would look at some
of the experiments, like NumPy, the fact that we have this split is a factor of I wasn't
able to collect more money towards NumPy development, right?
I mean, it didn't succeed in the early days of getting enough financial contribution to
NumPy, so they didn't really work on it, right?
I couldn't work on it full time.
I had to just catch an hour here, an hour there, and I basically not like that.
I've wanted to be able to do something about that for a long time and try to figure out
how, well, there's lots of ways, I mean, possibly one could say, you know, we had an offer from
Microsoft at early days of Anaconda, 2014, they offered to come buy us, right?
The problem was the right people at Microsoft didn't offer to buy us, and they were still,
it was really, we were like a second, they had really bought, they had just bought R,
the R company called, it was not R Studio, but it was another R company that was emergent,
and it was kind of a, well, we should also get a Python play, but they were really double
it down on R, right?
And so it was like...
It was where you would go to die, so it wasn't, it was before Saatcha was there.
Saatcha had just started.
Just started.
Right?
And the offer was coming from someone two levels down from him.
Got you.
So it would come from Scott Guthrie, so I got a chance to meet Scott Guthrie, great
guy, I like him.
If it offered to come from him, probably would be at Microsoft right now.
That'd be fascinating.
And that would be really nice, actually, especially given what Microsoft has since done for the
open source community and all those things.
Yes, I think they're doing well.
I really like some of the stuff they've been doing.
They're still working, and they've hired Guido now, and they've hired a lot of Python developers.
Wait, Guido's not at Microsoft?
Yeah.
I need to...
He retired, then he came out of retirement, and he's working on...
I was just talking to him, and he didn't mention this part.
Well...
I should have better to get this further, because I know he loved Dropbox, but I wasn't
sure what he was doing, or what he was up to.
Well, he was kind of saying he'd retire, but it's literally been five years since I last
sat down and really talked to Guido, right?
Guido's a technology expert, right?
So I came, I was excited because I'd finally figured out the type system for NumPy.
I wanted to kind of talk about that with him, and I kind of overwhelmed him.
Could you stay in that...
Just for a brief moment, because you're a fascinating person in the history of programming.
He is a fascinating person.
What have you learned from Guido about programming, about life?
Yeah, yeah.
A lot, actually.
I've been a fan of Guido's.
We have a chance to talk.
Some, I wouldn't say we talk all the time, not really at all, but we've talked enough
to...
In fact, when I first started NumPy, one of the first things I did was I asked Guido
for a meeting with him and Paul de Bois in San Mateo, and I went and met him for lunch.
Basically, to say, maybe we can actually...
Part of the strategy for NumPy was to get it into Python 3, and maybe be part of Python.
So we talked about that, and about that approach, right?
That's a cool conversation.
I would have loved to be a fly in the water.
That was good.
Over the years for Guido, I learned...
So he was open.
He was willing to listen to people's ideas, right, and over the years.
Now, generally, I'm not saying universally that's been true, but generally that's been
true.
So he's willing to listen.
He's willing to defer.
Like on the scientific side, he would just defer.
He didn't really always understand what we were doing, and he'd defer.
One place where he didn't enough was we missed a matrix multiply operator.
Like that finally got added to Python, but about 10 years later than it should have.
The reason was because nobody... it takes a lot of effort, and I learned this while
I was writing NumPy.
I also wrote tools to...
I became a Python dev, and I added some pieces to Python, like the memory view object.
I wanted the structure of NumPy into Python.
So we didn't get NumPy into Python, but we got the basic structure of it into Python,
so you could build on it.
Nobody did for a while, but eventually, database authors started to, and it's a lot better.
They did.
And also, Antoine Petrot and Stefan Krau actually fixed the memory view object, because I wrote
the underlying infrastructure in C, but the Python exposure was terrible until they came
in and fixed it, partly because I was writing NumPy, and NumPy was the Python exposure.
I didn't really care about if you didn't have NumPy installed.
Anyway, Guido opened up ideas, technologically brilliant.
I really got a lot of respect from when I saw what he did with this type class merger
thing.
It was actually tricky, and then willing to share.
Willing to share his ideas.
So the other thing, early on in 1998, I said I start wrote my first extension module.
The reason I could is because he wrote this blog post on how to do reference counting.
And without it, I would have been lost.
But he was willing to at least try to write this post.
And so he's been motivated, early on with Python, there's a computer science for everybody.
We're going to have this early on desire to, oh, maybe we should be pushing programming
to more people.
So he had this populist notion, I guess, or populist sense.
So there's a certain skill, and I've seen it in other people, too, of engaging with
contributors sufficiently to, because when somebody engages with you and wants to contribute
to you, if you ignore them, they go away.
So building that early contributor base requires real engagement with other people, and he
would do that.
Can you also comment on this tragic stepping down from his position as the benevolent
dictator for life over the war's, you know, the walrus operator, the walrus operator was
the last battle.
I don't know if that's the cause of it, but there's this, for people who don't know,
you can look up, there's the walrus operator, which is, looks like a colon and equal sign.
Yeah, colon, equal sign.
And it actually does maybe the thing that you, that an equal sign should be doing.
Yeah.
Maybe.
Right.
It's just historically, an equal sign means something else, it just means a Simon.
So he stepped down over this, what do you think about the pressure of leadership?
It's something that you mentioned, the letter I wrote in Empire of the Time, that was a
hard time actually, I mean, you know, there's been really hard times, it was hard, you know,
you get criticized, right?
And you get pushed, and you get, not everybody loves what you do, like anytime you do anything
that has impact at all, you're not universally loved, right?
You get some real critics, and that's an important energy because it's impossible for you to
do everything right.
You need people to be pushing, but sometimes people can get mean, right?
People can, I prefer to give people the benefit of the doubt, I don't immediately assume they
have bad intentions.
And maybe for other, you know, maybe that doesn't happen for everybody, they, for whatever
reason, their past, their experience of people, they sometimes have bad intentions, so they
immediately attribute to you bad intentions, they're like, where did this come from?
And I definitely open to criticism, but I think you're misinterpreting the whole point.
Because I would get that, you know, sort of when I started Anaconda, you know, I've been,
sometimes I say to people, I know I'm, I care enough about entrepreneurship to make some
open source people uncomfortable, and I care enough about open source to make investors
uncomfortable.
So I sort of, you know, create, you create kind of doubters on both sides.
So when you have, and this is just a plea to the listener and the public, I've noticed
this too, that there's a tendency in social media makes this worse, when you don't have
perfect information about the situation, you tend to fill the gaps with the worst possible,
or at least a bad story that fills those gaps.
And I think it's good to live life, maybe not fully naively, but filling in the gaps
with the, with the good, with the best, with the positive, with the hopeful explanation
of why you see this.
So if you see somebody like you trying to make money on a book about NumPy, there's
a million stories around that that are positive.
And those are good to think about, to project positive intent on the people.
Because for many reasons, usually because people are good, and they do have good intent.
And also when you project that positive intent, people will step up to that.
It's a great point.
It has this kind of viral nature to it.
And of course, what Twitter early on figured out on Facebook is that they can make a lot
of money and engagement from the negative.
Yes.
And so like there's this, we're fighting this mechanism, which is challenging.
It's like easier.
It's just easier to be.
To be negative.
And then for some reason, something in our mind really enjoys sharing that and getting,
getting all excited about the negativity.
We do.
Yeah.
It's a great mechanism perhaps that we're, we're going to eat and if we don't.
Exactly.
For us to be effective as a group of people in a software engineering project, you have
to project positive intent, I think.
I totally agree.
Totally agree.
And I think that's very, and so that happens in this, in the space, but Python has done
a reasonable job in the past, but here's a situation where I think it's, it started
to get this pressure where it didn't.
I was, I really didn't, I didn't know enough about what happened.
I've, you know, talked to several people about it.
And I know most of the steering committee members today, one, one person nominated me
for that role, but it's the wrong role for me right now, right?
I have a lot of respect for the Python developer space and the Python developers.
I also understand the gap between computer science Python developers and array programming
developers or science developers.
And in fact, Python succeeds in the array space.
The more it has people in that boundary and there's often very few, like I was playing
a role in that boundary and, you know, working like everything to try to keep up with the,
with the, what, even what Gita was saying.
Like I'm a C programmer, but not a computer scientist, like I was a engineer and physicist
and mathematician and I don't, I didn't always understand what they were talking about and
why they would have opinions the way they did.
So you know, you have to listen and try to understand, then you also have to explain
your point of view in a way they can understand.
And that takes a lot of work and that, that communication is always the challenge.
And it's just what we're describing here about the negativity is just another form
of that.
Like how do we come together?
And it does appear we were wired anyway to at least have a, there's a part of us that
will enemy, you know, friend, enemy and, and we see, yeah, it's like, why are we wiring
on the enemy front?
Yeah.
So, so why are we pushing that?
Why are we promoting that so deeply?
Assume friend until proven otherwise.
Yes.
So because you have such a fascinating mind and all this, let me just ask you these questions.
So one interesting side on the Python history is the move from Python two to Python three.
You mentioned move from Python one to Python two, but the move from Python two to Python
three is a little bit interesting because it took a very long time.
It broke in quite a small way, backward compatibility, but even that small way seemed to have been
very painful for people.
Is there a lessons you draw from, from how long it took and how painful it seemed to
be?
Yeah, tons of lessons.
I mentioned here earlier that NumPy was written in 2005.
It was in 2005 that I actually went to Guido to talk about getting NumPy into Python three.
Like my strategy was to, oh, we were moving to Python three.
Let's have that be.
And it seems funny in retrospect because like, wait, Python three, that was in 2020, right,
when we finally ended support for Python two or at least 2017.
The reason it took a long time, a lot of time, I think it was because one of the things is
there wasn't much to like about Python three, 3.0, 3.1, it really wasn't until 3.3, like
I consider Python 3.3 to be Python 3.0, but it wasn't until Python 3.3 that I felt there's
enough stuff in it to make it worth anybody using it, right?
And then 3.4 started to be, oh, yeah, I want that.
And then 3.5 as the matrix move play operator, and now it's like, okay, we got to use that.
Plus the libraries that started leveraging some of the features of Python three.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And then there was, it was, but it also illustrated a truism that, you know, it's, when you have
inertia, when you have a group of people using something, it's really hard to move them away
from it.
You can't just change the world on them.
And Python three, you know, it made some, I think it fixed some things, Guido had always
hated it.
I don't think he didn't like the fact that print was a statement.
He wanted to make it a function.
But in some sense, that's a bit of gratuitous change to the language.
And you could argue, and there's people have, but there was, one of the challenges was there
wasn't enough features and too many just changes without features.
And so the empathy for the end user as to why they would switch wasn't, wasn't there.
I think also it illustrated just the funding realities.
Like Python wasn't funded.
Like it was also a project with a bunch of volunteer labor, right?
It had more people, so more volunteer labor, but it was still, it was fun to the sense
that at least Guido had a job.
And I've learned some of the behind the scenes on that now since talking to people who have
put through it, and maybe not on air, we can talk about some of that, but it's interesting
to see, but Guido had a job, but his full time job wasn't just work on Python.
Like he had other things to do.
It's just wild.
It is wild, isn't it?
As wild as how few people are funded, and how much impact they have.
Maybe that's a feature in our bug.
I don't know.
Maybe, yes, exactly.
At least early on.
It's sort of, I know.
Yeah.
It's like Olympic athletes are often severely underfunded, but maybe that's what brings
out the greatness.
Correct.
Yes, correct.
No, exactly.
Maybe this is the essential part of it, because I do think about that in terms of, I currently
have an incubator for open source startups.
What I'm trying to do right now is create the environment I wished it existed when I was
leaving academia with NumPy and trying to figure out what to do.
I'm trying to create those opportunities and environments.
And that's what drives me still, is how do I make the world easier for the open source
entrepreneur?
Let me stay, I could probably stay in NumPy for a long time, but this is a fun question.
So Andre Capati leads the Tesla autopilot team, and he's also one of the most legit programmers.
I know.
He builds stuff from scratch a lot, and that's how he builds intuition about how a problem
works.
He builds it from scratch, and I always love that.
And the primary language he uses is Python for the intuition building.
But he posted something on Twitter saying that they got a significant improvement on
some aspect of their data loading, I think, by switching away from NP.square root, so the
NumPy's implementation of square root to math.square root, and then somebody else commented that
you can get even a much greater improvement by using the vanilla Python square root,
which is like...
Power 0.5.
And it's fascinating to me, I just wanted to...
So that was some shade throwing at some...
No, no.
And yes, we're talking about...
It's a good way to ask the trade off between usability and efficiency broadly in NumPy,
but also in these specific weird quirks of a single function.
So on that point, if you use a NumPy math function on a scaler, it's going to be slower
than using a Python function on that scaler.
Because the math object in NumPy is more complicated, because you can also call that
math object on an array.
And so effectively, it goes through a similar machine where there aren't enough of the...
Which you could do, like checks and fast paths.
So yeah, if you're basically doing a list, if you run over a list, in fact, for problems
that are less than 1,000, even maybe 10,000 is probably the...
If you're going more than 10,000, that's where you definitely need to be using arrays.
But if you're less than that, and for reading, if you're doing a reading process, and essentially
it's not compute bound, it's IO bound, and so you're really taking lists of 1,000 at
a time and then doing work on it, yeah, you could be faster just using Python.
Straight up Python.
See, but also, this is the fundamental questions when you look at the long arc of history.
It's very possible that np.square root is much faster.
It could be.
So in terms of don't worry about it, it's the evils of over optimization or whatever,
all the different quotes around that is sometimes obsessing about this particular little quirk
is not sufficient.
For somebody like, if you're trying to optimize your path, I agree, premature optimization
creates all kinds of challenges, right, because now, but you may have to do it.
I believe the quote is the root of all evils.
The root of all evils, right?
I mean, let's give Don Knuth, I think, or let's give Don Knuth somebody else.
Well, Don Knuth is kind of like Mark Twain, people just attribute stuff to him, I don't
know.
And it's fine because he's brilliant.
No, I was a latech user myself, and so I have a lot of respect, and he did more than
that, of course, but yeah, someone I really appreciate in the computer science space.
Yeah, I think that's appropriate.
There's a lot of little things like that where people, actually, if you understood it, you
go, yeah, of course, that's the case.
And the other part I didn't mention, and Numba was a thing we wrote early on, and I was really
excited by Numba because it's something we wanted, it was a compiler for Python syntax.
I wanted it from the beginning of writing NumPy because of this function question, like
taking, the power of arrays is really that you can write functions using all of it.
It has implicit looping.
Right?
So you don't worry about, I write this n dimensional for loop with four loops for four statements.
You just say, oh, big four dimensional array, I'm going to do this operation, this plus,
this minus, this reduction.
And you get this, it's called vectorization in other areas, but you can basically think
at a high level and get massive amounts of computation done.
With the added benefit of, oh, it can be paralyzed easily, it can be put in parallel, you don't
have to think about that.
In fact, it's worse to go decompose your, you write the four loops and then try to infer
parallelism from four loops.
That's actually harder problem than to take the array problem and just automatically parallelize
that problem.
That's what, and so functions in NumPy are called universal functions, ufunc.
So square root is an example of a ufunc.
There are others, sine, cosine, add, subtract.
In fact, one of those first libraries to PsiPy was something called special where I added
vessel functions and all these special functions that come up in physics and I added them as
ufunc so they could work on arrays.
So I understood ufuncs very, very well from day one inside of numeric.
That was one of the things we tried to make better in NumPy was how do they work?
Can they do broadcasting?
What does broadcasting mean?
But one of the problems is, okay, what do I do with a Python scalar?
So what happens, the Python scalar gets broadcast to a zero dimensional array and then it goes
through the whole same machinery as if it were a 10,000 dimensional array and then it
kind of unpacks the element and then does the addition.
That's not to mention the function it calls in the case of square root is just the C lab
square root, right?
In some cases, like Python's power, there's some optimizations they're doing that can
be faster than just calling this the C lab square root.
In the interpreter or in the C code?
No, in the C code.
In the Python runtime.
In the Python.
So they really optimize it and they have the freedom to do that because they don't have
to worry about it.
It's just a scalar.
It's just a scalar, right?
They don't have to worry about the fact that, oh, this could be an object with many pieces.
The ufunc machine is also generic in sense that typecasting and broadcasting.
Broadcasting's idea of I'm going to go, I have a zero dimensional array, I have a scalar
with a four dimensional array and I add them.
Oh, I have to kind of coerce the shape of this guy to make it work against the whole
four dimensional array.
So it's the idea of I can do a one dimensional array against a two dimensional array and
have it make sense.
Well, that's what NumPy does is it challenges you to reformulate, rethink your problem as
a multi dimensional array problem versus like move away from scalars completely.
Right, exactly.
Yeah.
Exactly.
In fact, that's where some of the edge cases boundaries are is that, well, they're still
there and this is where array scalars are particular.
So array scalars are particularly bad in the sense that they were written so that you
could optimize the math on them, but that hasn't happened, right?
And so their default is to you is to coerce the array scalar to a zero dimensional array
and then use the NumPy machinery.
That's what you could specialize, but it doesn't happen all the time.
So in fact, when we first wrote Numba, we do comparisons and say, look, it's a thousand
X speed up.
We're lying a little bit in the sense that, well, first do the 40 X slowdown of using the
array scalars inside of a loop because if you used to use Python scalars, you'd already
be 10 times faster.
Yeah.
But then we would get a hundred times faster over that using just compilation.
And what we do is compile the loop from out of the interpreter to machine code.
And then that's always been the power of Python is this extensibility so you can, could people
say, oh, Python's so slow?
Well, sure.
If you do all your logic in the runtime of the Python interpreter, yeah.
But the power is that you don't have to.
You write all the logic which you do in the high level is just high level logic.
And the actual calls you're making could be on gigabyte arrays of data.
And that's all done at compiled speeds.
And the fact that integration is one can happen, but two is separable.
That's one of the, the language like Julia says, we're going to be all in one.
You can do all of it together.
And then there's, the jury's out.
Is that possible?
I tend to think that you're going to, there's separate concerns there.
You want to precompile.
In fact, generally you will want to precompile your, some of your loops.
Like scipy is a compilation step to install scipy.
It takes about two hours.
If you have many machines, maybe you can get it down to one hour, but to compile all those
libraries takes about, takes a while.
You don't want to do that at runtime.
You don't want to do that all the time.
You want to have this precompiled binary available that you're then just linking into.
So there's real questions about the whole, you know, source code code is running binary
code is more than source code.
It's create an object code.
It's the linker.
It's the loader.
It's the, how does that interpret it inside of a virtual memory space?
There's a lot of details there that actually I didn't understand for a long time until
I, you know, read books on the topic and it, and it led to the more you know, the better
off you are and you can do more details, but sometimes it helps with abstractions too.
Well the problem, as we mentioned earlier with abstractions is you kind of sometimes
assume that whoever implemented this thing had your case in mind and found the optimal
solution.
Yes.
Or like you assume certain things, I mean, there's a lot of, one of the really powerful
things to me early on, I mean, it sounds silly to say, but with Python probably one
of the reasons I fell in love with it is dictionaries.
Yes.
So obviously probably most languages have some mapping concept, some mapping concept,
but it felt like it was a first class citizen and it was just my brain was able to think
in dictionaries.
But then there's the thing that I guess I still use to this day is order dictionaries
because that seems like a more natural way to construct dictionaries and from a computer
science perspective, the running time cost is not that significant, but there's a lot
of things to understand about dictionaries that the abstraction kind of doesn't necessarily
incentivize you to understand.
Right.
You really understand the notion of a hash map and how the dictionary is implemented,
but you're right.
Dictionaries are a good example of an abstraction that's powerful and I agree with you, I love
dictionaries too.
It took me a while to understand that once you do you realize, oh, they're everywhere
and Python uses them everywhere too.
It's actually constructed one of the foundational things as dictionaries and it does everything
with dictionaries.
Yes.
So it is, it's powerful.
Order dictionaries came later, but it is very, very powerful.
It took me a little while coming from just the array programming entirely to understand
these other objects like dictionaries and lists and tuples and binary trees.
Like I said, I wasn't a computer scientist, but I studied arrays first and so I was very
array centric and you realize, oh, these others don't have purposes and value actually.
I agree.
There's a friendliness about like one way to think about arrays is arrays are just like
full of numbers, but to make them accessible to humans and make them less error prone to
human users, sometimes you want to attach names, human interpretable names that are
sticky to those arrays.
So that's how you start to think about dictionaries is you start to convert numbers into something
that's human interpretable and that's actually the tension I've had with NumPy because I've
built so much tooling around human interpretability and also protecting me from a year later
not making the mistakes by being, I wanted to force myself to use English versus numbers.
Yes.
So there's a, there's a project called label arrays.
Like very early, it was recognized that, oh, we need, we're indexing NumPy with just numbers,
all the columns and particularly the dimensions.
I mean, if you have an image, you don't necessarily need to label each column a row, but if you
have a lot of images or you have another dimension, you'd at least like to label the dimension
as this is X, this is Y, this is Z or this is, give us some human meaning or some domain
sort of meaning.
That was one of the impetuses for pandas actually was just, oh, we do need to label these things
and label, label array was an attempt to add that like a lighter weight version of that.
And there's been, like that's an example of something I think NumPy could add, could
be added to NumPy, but one of the challenges again, how do you fund this?
Like, like I said, one of the tragedies I think is that, so I never had the chance to,
I was never paid to work on NumPy, right?
So I've always just done it my spare time, always taken from one thing, taken from another
thing to do it.
And at the time, I mean, today, it would be the wrong day of today, like paying me to
work on NumPy now would not be a good use of effort, but, but we are finally at Quonsite
Labs.
I'm actually paying people to work on NumPy and SciPy, which is I'm thrilled with, I'm
excited by.
I've wanted to do that, that's why I always wanted to do it from day one, it just took
me a while to figure out a mechanism to do that.
Even like in the university setting, respecting that, like pushing students, young minds, the
young graduate students to contribute and then figuring out financial mechanisms that
enable them to contribute and then sort of reward them for their innovative scientific
journey that that would be nice, but then also there's just a better allocation of resources.
Well, you know, it's 20 year anniversary since 9 11.
And I was just looking, we spent over $6 trillion in the Middle East after 9 11 in the various
efforts there and sort of to put politics and all that aside is just, you think about
the education system, all the other ways we could have possibly allocated that money.
To me, to take it back, the amount of impact you would have by allocating a little bit
of money to the programmers that build the tools that run the world is fascinating.
I mean, I don't know, I think again, there is some aspect to being broke as somewhat
of a feature, not a bug, that you make sure that you manage that.
Right. No, I know.
But I don't think that's a big part.
So it's like, I think you can have enough money and actually be wealthy while maintaining
your values.
Agreed.
I think.
There's an old adage that nations that trade together don't go to war together.
I've often thought about nations that code together.
Because one of the things I love about open source is it's global, it's multinational.
There aren't national boundaries.
One of the challenges with business and open source is the fact that business is national.
Like businesses are entities that are recognized in legal jurisdictions and have laws that
are respected in those jurisdictions and hiring and yet the open source ecosystem is not there.
Currently, one of the problems we're solving is hiring people all over the world.
Because it's a global effort and I've had the chance to work and I've loved the chance.
I've never been to Iran, but I once had a conference where I was able to talk to people
there and talk to folks in Pakistan and we've been there, but we had a call where there
are people there, like just scientists and normal people.
There's a certain amount of humanizing that gets away from the...
We often get the memes of society that bubble up and get discussed, but the memes are not
even an accurate reflection of the reality of what people are.
If you look at the major power centers that are leading to something like cyber war in
the next few decades, it's the United States, it's Russia and China.
Those three countries in particular have incredible developers.
If they work together, I think that's one way the politicians can do their stupid bickering,
but there's a layer of infrastructure, of humanity.
If they collaborate together, that I think can prevent major conflict, which would,
I think, most likely happen at the cyber level versus the actual hot war level.
You're right.
I think that's good prediction.
Nations that code together don't go to war together.
That's a hope.
That's one of the philosophical hopes.
You mentioned the project of Numba, which is fascinating.
From the early days, there was a pushback on Python that it's not fast.
If you want to write something that's fast, you use CC++.
If you want to write something that's usable and friendly, but slow, you use Python.
What is Numba?
What is its goal?
How does it work?
Great.
Yes, that's what the argument.
The reality was people would write high level code and use compiled code, but there's still
user stories, cases where you want to write Python, but then have it still be fast.
You still need to write a for loop.
Before Numba, it was always don't write a for loop.
Write it in a vectorized way, put it in an array, and often that can make a memory trade
off.
Quite often you can do it, but then you may use more memory because you have to build
this array of data that you don't necessarily need all the time.
Numba was, it started from a desire to have a vectorized that worked.
A vectorized was a tool in NumPy, it was released, you give it a Python function, and it gave
you a universal function, a UFUNC, so it would work on arrays.
So you get a function that just worked on a scalar, like the classic case was a simple
function that an if then statement in it, so sine x over x function, sync function.
If x equals 0, return 1, otherwise do sine x over x.
The challenge is you don't want that loop going in Python, so you want a compiled version
of that.
But the vectorized in NumPy would just give you a Python function.
So it would take the array of numbers and at every call do a loop back into Python.
So it was very slow.
It gave you the appearance of a UFUNC, but it was very slow.
So I always wanted a vectorized that would take that Python scalar function and produce
a UFUNC working on binary native code.
So in fact, I had somebody work on that with PyPy and see if PyPy could be used to produce
a UFUNC like that early on in 2009 or something like that, 2010.
They didn't work that well.
It was kind of pretty bulky.
But in 2012, Peter and I had just started Anaconda.
We had, I had just, I'd learned to raise money.
That's a different topic, but I'd learned to raise money from friends, family, and fools,
as they say.
That's a good line.
Oh, that's a good line.
So we were trying to do something.
We were trying to change the world.
Peter and I are super ambitious.
We wanted to make array computing and we had ideas for really what's still, it's still
the energy right now.
How do you do at scale data science?
We had a bunch of ideas there, but one of them, I had just talked to people by LLVM
and I was like, there's a way to do this.
I just, I went, I heard about my friend Dave Beasley at a compiler course.
So I was looking at compilers like, and I realized, oh, this is what you do.
And so I wrote a version of Numba that just basically mapped Python bytecode to LLVM.
Nice.
Right?
So, and the first version is like, this works and it produces code that's fast.
This is cool for, you know, obviously a reduced subset of Python.
I didn't support all of the Python language.
There had been efforts to speed up Python in the past, but those efforts were, I would
say not from the array computing perspective, not from the perspective of wanting to produce
a vectorize improvement.
They were from a perspective of speeding up the runtime of Python, which is fundamentally
hard because Python allows for some constructs that aren't, you can't speed up.
It's generic, you know, when it does this variable.
So I, from the start, did not try to replicate Python's semantics entirely.
I said, I'm going to take a subset of the Python syntax and let people write syntax
in Python, but it's kind of a new language, really.
So it's almost like for loops, like focusing on for loops, scalar arithmetic, you know,
typed, you know, really typed language, a type subset.
That was the key.
So, but we wanted to add inference of types, so you didn't have to spell all the types
out because when you call a function, so Python is typed, it's just dynamically typed.
You don't tell it what the types are, but when it runs, every time an object runs, there's
a type for the variables, you know what it is.
And so that was the design goals of Numba were to make it possible to write functions that
could be compiled and have them use for NumPyRays, like the need to support NumPyRays.
And so how does it work?
Do you add a comment within Python that tells it to do, like, how do you help out a compiler
to know what to do?
There isn't much, actually.
You don't.
It's kind of magical in a sense.
It just looks at the type of the objects and then does type inference to determine any
of the other variables it needs.
And then it was also because we had a use case that could work early, like one of the challenges
of any kind of new development is if you have something that to make it work, it was going
to take you a long time, it's really hard to get out off the ground.
If you have a project where there's some incremental story that can start working today and solve
a problem, then you can start getting it out there, getting feedback.
Because Numba today, now Numba is nine years old today, right?
The first two, three versions were not great, right?
But they solved a problem and some people could try it and we could get some feedback
on it.
Not great.
And it was very focused.
Very fragile.
Oh, the fragility.
The subset it would actually compile was small.
And so if you wrote Python code and said, so the way it worked is you write a function
and you say atJit.
Use decorators.
So decorator is just these little constructs that you decorate code with an app and then
a name.
The atJit would take your Python function and actually just compile it and replace the Python
function with another function that interacts with this compile function.
Got it.
So you could do that and we went from Python byte code, then we went to AST.
Writing compiler is actually, I learned a lot about why computer science is taught the
way it is because compilers can be hard to write.
They use tree structures.
They use all the concepts of computer science that are needed and it's actually hard to,
it's easy to write a compiler and then have it be spaghetti code.
The passes become challenging and we ended up with three versions of Numba, right?
Numba got written three times.
The programming language is number written in.
Python.
Wait.
Okay.
Yeah, Python.
Really?
That's fascinating.
Yeah, so Python, but then the whole goal of Numba is to translate Python byte code to
LLVM.
And so LLVM actually does the code generation.
In fact, a lot of times they'd say, yeah, it's super easy to write a compiler if you're
not writing the parser, nor the code generator, right?
For people who don't know, LLVM is the compiler itself, so you're compiling it.
It's really badly named low level virtual machine, which that part of it is not used.
It's really low level.
First, he doesn't mean that.
Yeah.
Love, Chris.
But the name makes you imply that the virtual machine is what it's all about.
It's actually the IR and the library that the code generation, that's the real beauty
of it.
The fact that what I love about LLVM was the fact that it was a plateau you could collaborate
on, right?
Instead of the internals of GCC or the internals of the Intel compiler, how do I extend that?
It was a place you could collaborate.
We were early.
I mean, people had started before.
It's a slow compiler.
It's not a fast compiler.
For some kind of JITs, JITs are common in the language because, one, every browser has
a JavaScript JIT.
It does real time compilation of the JavaScript to machine code.
For people who don't know, JIT is just in time compilation.
Thank you.
Yeah, just in time compilation.
They're actually really sophisticated.
In fact, I got jealous of how much effort was put into the JavaScript JITs.
Yes.
Well, it's kind of incredible what they've done with JavaScript JITs.
I completely agree.
I'm very impressed.
Number was an effort to make that happen with Python.
We used some of the money we raised from Anaconda to do it, and then we also applied for this
DARPA grant and used some of that money to continue the development, and then we used
proceeds from service projects we would do.
We get consulting projects that we would then use some of the profits to invest in number.
We ended up with a team of two or three people working on number.
It was a fits and starts, and ultimately, the fact that we had a commercial version
of it, also we were writing.
Part of the way I was trying to fund numbers, say, let's do the free number, and then we'll
have a commercial version of number called number pro.
Then what number pro did is it targeted GPUs.
We had the very first CUDA JIT and the very first at JIT compiler that in 2013, you could
run not just a viewfunk on CPU, but a viewfunk on GPUs, and it would automatically parallelize
it and get 1,000 x speed on it.
That's an interesting funding mechanism because large companies or larger companies care about
speed in just this way, so it's exactly a really good way to fund it.
Yeah, there's been a couple of things you know people will pay for.
One, they'll pay for really good user interfaces, and so I'm always looking for what are the
other things people will pay for that you could actually adapt to the open source infrastructure.
One is definitely user interfaces.
The second is speed, like a better runtime, faster runtime.
And then when you say people, you mean like a small number of people pay a lot of money,
but then there's also this other mechanism that a ton of people pay a little bit.
First, we mentioned Anaconda, we mentioned friends, family, and fools, so Anaconda is
yet another, so there's a company, but there's also a project that is exceptionally impactful
in terms of for many reasons, but one of which is bringing a lot more people into the community
of folks who use Python.
So what is Anaconda?
What is its goals?
Maybe what is Kanda versus Anaconda?
Yeah, I'll tell you a little bit of the history of that, because Anaconda, we wanted to do,
we wanted to scale Python, because we, you know, Peter and I had the goal of when we
started Anaconda, we actually started as Continuum Analytics was the name of the company that
started.
It got renamed to Anaconda in 2015, but we said we want to scale analytics.
NumPy is great, Pan is emerging, but these need to run at scale with lots of machines.
The other thing we wanted to do was make user interfaces that were web, we wanted to make
sure the web did not pass by the Python community, that we had a ways to translate your data
science to the web.
So those are the two kind of technical areas and we thought, oh, we'll build products in
this space.
And that was the idea.
Very quickly in, but of course, the thing I knew how to do was to do consulting to make
money and to make sure my family and friends and the whole city invested didn't lose their
money.
So it's a little different than if you take money from a venture fund, you take money
from a venture fund.
The venture fund, they want you to go big or go home.
They're kind of like expecting 9 out of 10 to fail or 99 out of 100 to fail.
It's different, I was at a barbell strategy, I was like, I can't fail.
I mean, I may not do super well, but I cannot lose their money.
So I'm going to do something I know can return a profit, but I want to have exposure to an
upside.
So that's what happened in Anaconda.
We didn't, there was lots of things we did not well in terms of that structure and I've
learned from since to have it better.
But we did a really good job of kind of attracting the interest around the area to get good people
working and then get funneled some money on some interesting projects.
Super excited about what came out of our energy there.
Like a lot did.
So what are some of the interesting projects?
So Dask, Numba, Bokeh, Kanda, there was a data shader, Panel, Holoviz.
These are all tools that are extremely relevant in terms of helping you build applications,
build tools, build faster code.
The Bokeh is applauding.
There's a couple I'm beginning.
Oh, JupiterLab.
JupiterLab came out of this too.
That's fascinating.
Yeah.
Okay.
So Bokeh does plotting.
Bokeh does plotting.
So Bokeh was one of the foundational things to say, I want to do plot in Python, but have
the things show up in a web.
Right.
That's right.
And plotting to me still, with all due respect to Matplotlib and Bokeh, it feels like still
an unsolved problem.
Oh, it is.
Not a solved problem.
It is.
It's a big problem.
Right.
Because you're, I mean, I don't know, it's visualization broadly, right?
Yes.
So important.
I think we've got a pretty good API story around certain use cases of plotting.
But there's a difference between static plots versus interactive plots versus, I'm an end
user, I just want to write a simple, for, you know, pandas started the idea of here's
a data frame on a dot plot, I'm just going to attach plot as a method to my object, which
was a little bit controversial, right?
But works pretty well actually, because there's a lot less you have to pass in, right?
You can just say, here's my object, you know what you are, you tell the visualization what
to do.
So that, and there's things like that that have not been, you know, super well developed
entirely, but Bokeh was focused on interactive plotting.
So you could, it's a short path between interactive plotting and application, dashboard application.
And there's some incredible work that got done there, right?
And it was a hard project because then you're basically doing JavaScript and Python.
So we wanted to tackle some of these hard problems and try to just go after them.
We got some DARPA funding to help, and it was super helpful.
It's a funny story there, we actually did two DARPA proposals, but one we were five
minutes late for, and DARPA has a very strict cutoff window.
And so I, we had two proposals, one for the Bokeh and one for actually Numba and the other
work.
Which one were you late for?
The foundation on the miracle work.
So Bokeh got funded.
Oh no.
Fortunately, Chris let us use some of the money to fund still some of the other foundational
work, but it wasn't as, yeah, his hands were tied, he couldn't do anything about it.
That was a whole interesting story.
So one of the incredible projects that you worked on is Conda.
Yes.
So what is Conda?
So how that came about?
Yeah, Conda, it was early on, like I said, was SciPy.
SciPy was a distribution masqueraderies in a library.
And you said, you heard me talking about compiler issues and trying to get the stuff shipped
and the fact that people can use your libraries if they have it.
So for a long time, we'd understood the packaging problem in Python.
And one of the first things we did at Continue Analytics, we came out of Conda, was organize
the PyData ecosystem in conjunction with NumFocus.
We actually started NumFocus with some other folks in the community the same year we started
in a content.
I said, we're going to build a corporation, but we also got to reify the community aspect
and build a nonprofit.
So we did both of those.
Can we pause real quick and can you say what is PyPy, the Python package index, like this
whole story of packaging in Python?
Yeah, that's what I'm going to get to actually.
This is exactly the journey I'm on.
This is sort of explain packaging in Python.
I think it's best expressed to the conversation I had with Gito at a conference where I said,
so packaging is kind of a problem.
And Gito said, I don't ever care about packaging.
I don't use it.
I don't install new libraries.
I'm like, I guess if you're the language creator and if you need something, you just
put it in the distribution.
Maybe you don't worry about packaging.
But Gito has never really cared about packaging, right?
And never really cared about the problem of distribution.
Somebody else's problem.
And that's a fair position to take, I think, as a language creator.
In fact, there's a philosophical question about should you have different development
packaging managers?
Should you have a package manager per language?
Is that really the right approach?
I think there are some answers of it is appropriate to have development tools.
And there's an aspect of development tool that is related to packaging.
And every language should have some story there to help their developers create.
So you should have language specific development tools that relate to package managers.
But then there's a very specific user story around package management that those language
specific package managers have to interact with and currently aren't doing a good job
of that.
That was one of the challenges of not seeing that difference and still exists in the difference
today.
Kanda always was a user, I'm going to use Python to do data science.
I'm going to use Python to do something.
How do I get this installed?
It was always focused on that.
So it didn't have a develop.
Classic example is PIP has a PIP develop.
It's like, I want to install this into my current development environment today.
Now, Kanda doesn't have that concept because it's not part of the story.
For people who don't know, PIP is a Python specific package manager.
That's exceptionally popular.
That's probably like the default thing you learn.
It's the default user.
So the story there emerged because what happened is in 2012, we had this meeting at the Google
Plex and Guido was there to come talk about what we're going to do, how we're going to
make things work better, and Wes McKinney, me, Peter, Peter has a great photo of me talking
to Guido and he pretends we're talking about this story.
Maybe we were.
But we did at that meeting talk about it and asked Guido, we need to fix packaging in Python.
I'm like, people can't get this stuff.
And he said, go fix it yourself.
I don't think we're going to do it.
All right.
The origin story right there.
You said, okay.
You said to do this ourselves.
At the same time, people did start to work on the packaging story in Python.
It just took a little longer.
So in 2012, kind of motivated by our training courses we were teaching, like very similar
to what you just mentioned about your mother, like it was motivated by the same purpose.
Like, how do we get this into people's hands and it's this big, long process that takes
too expensive?
It was actually hurting NumPy development because I would hear people were saying, don't make
that change to NumPy because I just spent a week getting my Python environment.
And if you change NumPy, you have to reinstall everything and reinstalling such a pain, don't
do it.
I'm like, wait.
Okay.
So now we're not making changes to a library because of the installation problem that will
cause for end users.
Okay.
There's a problem with pack.
There's a problem with installation.
We got to fix this.
So we said, we're going to make a distribution of Python and we'd previously done that, previously
done that at end thought.
I wanted to make one that would give away for free that one could just get like those critical
that we just get it, you know, it wasn't tied to a product, it was just you could get
it.
And then we had constantly thought about, well, do we just leverage RPM?
But the challenge had always been, we want a package manager that works on Windows, Mac
OS X and Linux the same, right?
And it wasn't there.
Like you don't have anything like that.
And for people who don't know, RPM is operating system specific package.
Correct.
It's an operating specific.
Yes.
So do you create the design that question is, do you create an umbrella package manager
that cross operating system, yes, that was the decision and a neighboring design questions.
Do you also create a package manager that spans multiple programming languages?
Correct.
Exactly.
That was the world we faced.
And we decided to go multiple operating systems, multiple and programming language independent
because even Python and particularly what was important was sci pi has a bunch of 4chan
in it.
Right.
And scikit learn has links to a bunch of C plus plus.
There's a lot of compiled code.
And the Python package manager, especially early on, didn't even support that.
So in 2000, so we released anaconda, which was just a distribution of libraries, but
we started to work on conda in 2012.
First version of conda came out in early 2013, summer of 2013.
And it was a package manager.
So you could say conda install scikit learn.
In fact, that was the scikit learn was a fantastic project that emerged.
Kind of it was the classic example of the sidekits.
I told, talked to me earlier about scipy being too big to be a single library.
Well, what the community had done is said, let's make scikits and there's scikit image
or scikit learn.
There's a lot of scikits.
And it was a fantastic move, you know, that the community did.
I didn't do it.
I was like, okay, that's good idea.
I didn't like the name.
I didn't like the fact you type scikit image.
I was like, that's going to be simpler.
SK learn.
We got to make that smaller.
I like typing all this stuff from imports.
So I was kind of a pressure that way, but I love the energy and love the fact that they
went out and they did it and DOS people, Jared Milman, and then of course, Gael, and there's
people I'm not even naming that scikit learn really emerged this fantastic project.
And the documentation around that is also incredible.
It was incredible.
Exactly.
I don't know who did that.
But they did a great job.
A lot of people in Inria, a lot of people, a lot of European contributors, Andreas, there's
some Andreas in the U.S. There's a lot of just people I just adore.
I think are amazing people.
Awesome use of scipy.
I love the fact that they were using scipy effectively because of my love, which is machine
learning, but couldn't install it because there's so many, so many dependencies, right?
So our use case of condo was cond install scikit learn, right?
And it was the best way to install scikit learn in 2013 to really 2018, 17, 18, pip finally
caught up.
I still think you should cond install scikit learn for the pip install scikit learn, but
you can pip install scikit learn.
The issue is the package they created was wheels, and pip does not handle the multi vendor
approach.
They don't handle the fact you have C++ libraries you're depending on.
They just stop at the Python boundary.
And so what you have to do in the wheel world is you have to vendor.
You have to take all of the binary and vendor it.
Now if your change happens in early dependency, you have to redo the whole wheel.
So TensorFlow is a good example, but you should not pip install TensorFlow.
It's a terrible idea if people do it because the popularity of pip, many people think,
of course, that's how I install everything in Python.
This is one of the big challenges.
You take a GitHub repository or just a basic blog post.
The number of time pip is mentioned over conda is like 100x to one.
Correct.
And that was increasing.
It wasn't true early because pip didn't exist.
Right.
Conda came first.
Like the long tail of the internet documentation user generated, so that you think, how do
I install, Google, how do I install TensorFlow, you're just not going to see conda in that
first page.
Correct.
Exactly.
And today you would have in 2016, 2017.
And it's sad because conda solves a lot of usability issues.
Correct.
Especially super challenging thing.
I don't know.
One of the big pain points for me was just on the computer vision side, OpenCV installation
that...
Perfect example.
I think conda...
I don't know if conda solved that one.
Conda has an OpenCV package.
I don't know.
I certainly know pip has not solved...
I mean, there's complexities there because...
Right.
I actually don't know.
I should probably know a good answer for this, but if you compile OpenCV with certain
dependencies, you'll be able to do certain things.
So there's this kind of flexibility of what options you compile with.
And I don't think it's trivial to do that with conda or with...
So conda has a notion of variance of a package.
You can actually have different compilation versions of a package.
So not just the versions different, but oh, this is compiled with these optimizations
on.
So conda does have an answer.
Has those flavors.
Has flavors, basically.
Well, pip, as far as I know, does not have flavors.
You know, pip generally hasn't thought deeply about the binary dependency problem, right?
That's why, fundamentally, it doesn't work for the scipy ecosystem.
It barely...
You can sort of paper over it and duct tape it and it kind of works until it doesn't
and it falls apart entirely.
So it's been a mixed bag.
Like...
And I've been having lots of conversations with people over the years because, again,
it's an area where if you understand some things, but not all the things, but they've
done a great job of community appeal.
This is an area where, I think, and a conda, as a company, need to do some things in order
to make conda more community centric, right?
And this is a...
I talk about this all the time.
There's a balance between...
You have...
Every project starts with what I call company backed open source.
Even if the company is yourself, this is one person, just doing business as.
But ultimately for products to succeed virally and become massive influencers, they have
to create...
They have to get community people on board.
They have to get other people on board.
So it has to become community driven and a big part of that is engagement with those
people, empowering people, governance around it.
And there was...
And what happened with conda in the early days, pip emerged, and we did do some good
things.
Conda Forge.
Conda Forge community is sort of the community recipe creation community.
But conda itself, I still believe, and Peter is CEO of Anaconda, he's my cofounder.
I ran Anaconda until 2017, 2018.
Is Peter still in Anaconda?
Peter still in Anaconda, right?
We're still great friends.
We talk all the time.
I love him to death.
There's a long story there about why and how, and we can cover in some other podcasts,
perhaps.
It's sort of a more, maybe a more business focused one.
But this is one area where I think conda should be more community driven.
He should be pushing more to get more community contributors to conda.
And Anaconda shouldn't be fighting this battle.
It's actually a...
It's really a developer.
You said help the developers, and then they'll actually move us the right direction.
Well, that was the problem I have as many of the cool kids I know don't use conda.
And that, to me, is confusing.
It is confusing.
It's really a matter of, conda has some challenges, first of all.
Conda still needs to be improved.
There's lots of improvements to be made.
And it's that aspect of, wait, who's doing this?
And the fact that then the PiPA really stepped up.
They were not solving the problem at all.
And now they kind of got to where they're solving it for the most part.
And then, effectively, you could get conda solved a problem that was there.
And it still does.
And it's still...
There's still great things it can do.
But...
And we still use it all the time at QuantSite and with other clients.
But you can kind of do similar things with Pippin Docker, right?
So especially with the web development community, part of it, again, is there's a lot of different
kind of developers in the Python ecosystem.
And there's still a lack of some clear understanding.
I go to the Python conference all the time and there's only a few people in the PiPA
who get it.
And then others who are just massively trumpeting the power of PIP but just do not understand
the problem.
Yeah.
So one of the obvious things to me from a mom, from a non programmer perspective is the
across operating system usability that's much more natural.
So they use Windows and just it seems much easier to recommend conda there.
But then you should also recommend it across the board.
So I'll definitely...
But what I recommend now is a hybrid.
I do.
I mean, I have no problem with PIP.
Is it possible to use...
Oh, it is.
It is.
Like build the environment with PIP with conda, build an environment with conda.
And then PIP install on top of that.
That's fine.
Be careful about PIP installing OpenCV or TensorFlow or...
Because if somebody's allowed that, it's going to be most surely done in a way that can't
be updated that easily.
So install like the big packages, the infrastructure with conda and then the weirdos that like
the weird like implementation for some head of there's a cool library I used that based
on your location and time of day and date tells you the exact position of the sun relative
to the earth.
Oh, very cool.
Yeah.
And it's just like a simple library.
But it's very precise.
And I was like, all right.
But that was...
That was...
And it's PIP...
Well, the thing they did really well is Python developers who want to get their stuff published,
you have to have a PIP recipe.
Yeah.
Right?
I mean, even if it's...
The challenge is...
And there's a key thing that needs to be added to PIP.
Just simply add to PIP the ability to defer to a system package manager because it's recognized
you're not going to solve all the dependency problem.
So let like give up and allow the system package to work.
That way, Anaconda is installed and it has PIP.
It would default to conda to install and stuff.
But Red Hat RPM would default to RPM to install more things.
Like that's a key, not difficult, but somewhat work.
Some work feature needs to be added.
That's an example of something like I've known we need to root and do it.
I mean, it's where I wish I had more money.
I wish I was more successful in the business side, trying to get there.
But I wish my family, friends and full community that I know...
Was larger.
...was larger and had more money because I know tons of things to do effectively with
more resources.
But I have not yet been successful a channel.
Tons of it.
I'm happy with what we've done.
We've created again at Quonsite what we created to get Anaconda started.
We created community to get Anaconda started, done it again with Quonsite.
Super excited by that.
By the way.
It took three years to do it.
What is Quonsite?
What is its mission?
We've talked a few times about different, fascinating aspects of it, but it's like
big picture.
What is Quonsite?
Big picture of Quonsite.
Quonsite is it's mission is to connect data to an open economy.
So it's basically consulting the pie data ecosystem.
It's a consulting company and what I've said when I started it was we're trying to create
products, people and technology.
So it's divided into two groups and a third one as well.
The two groups are a consulting services company that just helps people do data science and
data engineering and data management better and more efficiently.
Like full stack.
Get a science.
Full thing.
We'll help you build a infrastructure if you're using Jupiter.
We do staff augmentation, need more programmers, help you use DAS more effectively, help you
use GPUs more effectively.
Basically, a lot of people need help.
So we do training as well to help people, you know, both immediate help and then get
learned from somebody.
We've added a bunch of stuff too.
We kind of separated some of these other things into another company called Open Teams
that we currently started.
One of the things I loved about what we did at Anaconda was creating a community innovation
team.
So I wanted to replicate that.
This time, we did a lot of innovation at Anaconda.
I wanted to do innovation, but also contribute to the projects that existed.
Like create a place where maintainers, so that SciPy and NumPy and all these projects
we already started can pay people to work on them and keep them going.
So that's labs.
QuantSite Labs is a separate organization.
It's a nonprofit mission.
The profits of QuantSite help fund it.
And in fact, every project that we have at QuantSite, a portion of the money, goes directly
to QuantSite Labs to help keep it funded.
So we've gotten several mechanisms that we keep QuantSite Labs funded.
And currently, I'm really excited about labs because it's been a mission for a long time.
What kind of projects are within labs?
So labs is working to make the software better, like make NumPy better, make SciPy better.
It only works on open source.
So if somebody wants to, so companies do, we have a thing called a community work order,
we call it.
If a company says, I want to make Spyder better, okay, cool.
You can pay for a month of a developer of Spyder or developer of NumPy or developer of SciPy.
You can't tell them what you want them to do.
You can give them your priorities and things you wish existed.
And they'll work on those priorities with the community to get what the community wants
and what emerges with the community wants.
Is there some aspect on the consulting side that is helping as we were talking about morphology
and so on?
Is there a specific application that are particularly like driving, sort of inspiring the need for
updates to SciPy?
Correct.
Absolutely.
GPUs are absolutely one of them.
GPUs.
And new hardware beyond GPUs.
Dojo chip.
I'm hoping we'll have a chance to work on that perhaps.
Things like that are definitely driving it.
The other thing is driving is scalable, like speed and scale.
How do I write NumPy code or NumPy Lite code if I want it to run across a cluster?
Oh, that's Dask or maybe it's Ray.
I mean, there's sort of ways to do that now or there's Modin and there's, so pandas code,
NumPy code, SciPy code, second learn code that I want to scale.
So that's one big area.
Have you gotten a chance to chat with Andre and Elon about, because like...
No, I would love to, by the way.
Okay, great.
I'm not very loved to.
I just saw their Tesla AI days video.
Yeah.
Super exciting.
So this one of the, you know, I love great engineering, software engineering teams and
engineering teams in general and they're doing a lot of incredible stuff with Python.
They're like...
They are.
Revolutionary.
So many aspects of the machine learning pipeline.
I agree.
That's operating in the real world and so much of that is Python.
Like you said, the guy running, you know, Andre Kapathi, running autopilot is tweeting
about optimization of NumPy versus...
I'd love to talk to him.
In fact, we have at QuantSite, we've been fortunate enough to work with Facebook on
PyTorch directly.
So we have about 13 developers at QuantSite.
Some of them are in labs working directly on PyTorch.
On PyTorch.
That's great.
So I basically started QuantSite.
I went to both TensorFlow and PyTorch and said, hey, I want to help connect what you're
doing to the broader SciPy ecosystem because I see what you're doing.
We have this bigger mission that we want to make sure we don't lose energy here.
And Facebook responded really positively and I didn't get the same reaction.
Not yet.
I love the folks in TensorFlow.
I really love the folks in TensorFlow too.
They're fantastic.
I think it's just how it integrates with their business.
Like I said, there's a lot of reasons.
Just the timing, the integration with their business, what they're looking for.
They're probably looking for more users and I was looking to kind of kept some development
effort and they couldn't receive that as easily, I think.
So I'm hoping.
I'm really hopeful and love the people there.
What's the idea behind Open Teams?
So Open Teams, I'm super excited about Open Teams because it's one of the, I mentioned
my idea for investing directly in open source.
So that's a concept called FaroSS.
But one of the things we, when we started QuantSite, we knew we would do is we develop
products and ideas and new companies might come out.
At Anaconda, this was clear, right?
At Anaconda, we did so much innovation that like five or six companies could have come
out of that.
And we just didn't structure it so they could.
But in fact, they have.
You look at BASC, there's two companies coming out of BASC, Bokeh could be a company.
There's like lots of companies that could exist off the work we did there.
And so I thought, oh, here's a recipe for an incubation, a concept that we could actually
spawn new companies and new innovations.
And then the idea has always been, well, money they earn should come back to fund the open
source project.
So Labs is, I think there should be a lot of things like QuantSite Labs.
I think this concept is one that scales.
You could have a lot of open source research labs.
Along the way, so in 2018, when the bigger idea came how to make open source investor,
I said, oh, I need to write it.
I need to create a venture fund.
So we created a venture fund called QuantSite Initiate at the same time.
It's an angel fund, really.
We started to learn that process.
How do we actually do this?
How do we get LPs?
How do we go in this direction and build a fund?
And I'm like, every venture fund should have an associated open source research lab.
There's just no reason.
Like our venture fund, the carried interest portion of it goes to the lab.
It directly will fund the lab.
That's fascinating by the way.
So you use the power of the organic formation of teams in the open source community and
then naturally that leads to a business that can make a lot of money and then it always
maintains and loops back to the open source.
Loops back to open source.
Exactly.
There's a lot of fit.
There's absolutely a repeatable pattern there.
And it's also beneficial because, oh, I have natural connections to the open source.
If I have an open source research lab, they'll all be out there talking to people.
And so we've had a chance to talk to a lot of early stage companies and our fund focused
on the early stage.
So QuantSite has the services, the lab, the fund.
In that process, a lot of stuff started to happen.
They're like, oh, we started to do recruiting and support and training.
And I was starting to build a bigger sales team and marketing team and people besides
just developers.
And one of the challenges with that is you end up with different cultural aspects.
Developers, in any company you go to, you can go look, is this a business led company,
developer led company?
Do they coexist?
Are they, what's the interface between them?
There's always a bit of a tension there, like we were talking about before.
What is the tension there?
With open teams, I thought, wait a minute.
We can actually just create this concept of QuantSite plus labs.
While it's specific to the Piedata ecosystem, the concept is general for all open source.
So open teams emerged as a, oh, we can create a business development company for many, many
QuantSites, like thousands of QuantSites.
And it can be a marketplace to connect, essentially be the enterprise software company of the
future.
If you look at what enterprise software wants from the customer side, and during this journey
I've had the chance to work and sell to lots of companies, Exxon and Shell and Davey Morgan
of America, like the Fortune 100, and talk to a lot of people in procurement and see
what are they buying and why are they buying?
So I don't know everything, but I've learned a lot about, oh, what are they really looking
for?
And they're looking for solutions.
They're constantly given products from enterprise software.
Here's open source, these enterprise software, now I buy it, and then they have to stitch
it together into a solution.
Open source is fantastic for gluing those solutions together.
So whereas they keep getting new platforms they're trying to buy, but most open source,
most enterprises want is tools that they can customize that are as inexpensive as they
can.
Yeah.
And so you almost want to maintain the connection to the open source because that's going to
be the tools.
Yes.
So open teams is about solving enterprise software problems.
Brilliant.
Brilliant idea, by the way.
With a connect, but we do it honoring the topology.
We don't hire all the people.
We are a network connecting the sales energy and the procurement energy, and we were on
the business side, get the deals closed, and then have a network of partners like QuantSite
and others, who we hand the deals to, right, to actually do the work, and then we have
to maintain, I feel like we have to maintain some level of quality control so that the
client can rely on open teams to ensure their deliveries.
It's not just, here's a lead, go figure that out, but no, we're going to make sure you
get what you need.
Yeah.
By the way, it's such a skill, and I don't know if I have the patience, I will have the
patience to talk to the business people, or more specifically, I mean, there's all kinds
of flavors of business people, or like marketing people.
There's a challenge.
I hear what you're saying, because I've had the same challenge, and it's true.
There's some times you think, okay, this is way over a lot.
Yeah.
You have to become an adult, and you have to, because the companies have needs.
They have ways to make money, and they also want to learn and grow, and yet it's your
job to kind of educate them in the best way, like the value of open source, for example.
Right.
And I'm really grateful for all my experiences over the past 14 years, understanding that
side of it, and still learning, for sure, but not just understanding from companies,
but also dealing with marketing professionals, and sales professionals, and people that make
a career out of that, and understanding what they're thinking about, and also understanding,
well, let's make this better.
We can really make a place, like open teams I see as the transmission layer between companies
and open source communities, producing enterprise software solutions.
Eventually we want to, like today, we're taking on SaaS, and MATLAB, and tools that we know
we can replace for folks.
Really anytime you have a software tool at an organization where you have to do a lot
of customization or make it work for you, like it's not just buying this thing off
the shelf and it works.
It's like, okay, you buy this system, and then you customize it a lot, usually with
expensive consultants, to actually make it work for you.
All of those should be replaced by open source foundations, with the same customization.
Really, you're doing such important work, such important work in these giant organizations
that are doing exactly that, taking some proprietary software and hiring a huge team of consultants
that customize it, and then that whole thing gets outdated quick.
Correct.
Right.
I mean, that's brilliant.
The solution to that is kind of what Tesla is doing a little bit of, which is basically
build up a software engineering team, like build a team from scratch.
Build a team from scratch, and companies are doing it well.
That's what they're doing right now.
Yeah.
Right?
Exactly.
That's okay.
And you're creating a pathology for some of that.
You're right.
You just don't have to do it.
That's not the only answer.
Right?
And so other companies can access this, be more accessible.
We really, let's really say, open team is the future of enterprise software.
We're still early.
This idea just percolated over the past year as we've kind of grown quantized and realized
the extensibility of it.
We just finished in our seed round to help get more salespeople and then push the messaging
correctly.
And there's lots of tools we're building to make this easier, like we want to automate
the processes.
We feel like a lot of the power is the efficiency of the sales process.
There's a lot of wasted energy in small teams and the sales energy to get into large companies
and make a deal.
There's a lot of money spent on that process.
Creating the tools and processes for that sales.
So make that super seamless so a single company can go, oh, I've got my contract with open
teams.
We've got a subscription they can get.
They can make that procurement seamless.
And then the fact they have access to the entire open source ecosystem.
And we have a part of our work that's embracing open source ecosystems and making sure we're
doing things useful for them.
We're serving them.
And then companies making sure they're getting solutions they care about.
And then figuring out which targets we have.
We're not taking on all of open source, all of enterprise software yet.
But we're...
Well, this feels like the future.
The idea and the vision is brilliant.
Kasko, why do you think Microsoft bought GitHub and what do you think is the future
of GitHub?
Great point.
I thought it was a brilliant move.
I think they did because Microsoft has always had a developer centric culture, like they
always have.
Like one of the things Microsoft's always done well is understand that their power is developers,
right?
And Balmer didn't necessarily make a good meme about how he approached that, but names are
broadening that.
I think that's why.
Because they recognize GitHub is where developers are at, right?
And so...
But do they have a vision like open teams type of situation, right?
I don't think so yet.
I mean...
Are they just basically throwing money at developers to show their support without a topology?
Like you put it like a way to leverage that, like to give developers actual money.
Right.
I don't think so.
It's still...
It's an enterprise software company and they make a bunch of money.
They make a bunch of games.
They're a big company.
They sell products.
I think part of it is they know there's opportunity to make money from GitHub, right?
There's definitely a business there to sell to developers or to sell to people using development.
I think there's part of that.
I think part of it is also they had definitely wanted to recognize that you need to value
open source to get great developers, which is an important concept that was emerging
over the past 10 years that paid by data, we were able to convince JPMorgan to support
by data because of that fact, right?
That was where the money for them putting a couple of hundred thousand into supporting
by data for several conferences was they want developers and they realized that developers
want to participate in open source.
So enterprise software folks don't always understand how their software gets used.
Having spent a lot of time on the floors at JPMorgan in Shell and ExxonMobil, you see,
oh, these companies have large development teams.
And then they're kind of dealing with the what's being delivered to them.
So I really feel kind of a privilege that I had a chance to learn some of these people
and see what they're doing and even work alongside them as a consultant, using open
source and trying to figure out how to make this work inside of our large organization.
Some of it is actually for a large organization, some of it is messaging to the world that
you care about developers and you care.
For example, like at Ford, because I talked to them, the car companies, right?
They want to attract, you know, you want to take on Tesla and autopilot.
You want to take that, right?
And so what do you do there?
You show that you're cool, like you try to show off that you care about developers and
they have a lot of trouble doing that.
And like one way, I think like Ford should have bought GitHub, like just to show off
like these old school companies and it's in a lot of different industries.
There's probably different ways, it's probably an art to show that you care to developers.
And the developers, it's exactly like, for example, just spitballing here, but like
Ford or somebody like that could give $100 million to the development of NumPy and like
literally look at like the top most popular projects in Python and just say, we're just
going to give them money.
Right?
You want to immediately make you cool?
They could actually.
Yeah.
And in fact, you set up NumFocus to make it easy.
But the challenge was is also you have to have some business development.
Like it's a bit of a, it's a bit of a seeding problem, right?
And you look at how I've talked to the folks at Linux Foundation, know how they're doing
it.
I know how, and starting NumFocus, because we had two babies in 2012, one was Anaconda,
one was NumFocus, right?
And they were both important efforts.
They had distinct journeys and super grateful that both existed and still grateful both
exist.
But there's different energies in getting donations as there is getting, this is important
to my business.
Like I'm selling something that, this is not a, this is, I'm going to make money this
way.
Like if you can tie it, if you can tie the message to an ROI for the company, it becomes
a brainer.
That's more effective.
It's much more effective, right?
So, and there are rational arguments to make.
I've tried to have conversations with marketing, especially marketing departments.
Like very early on it was clear to me that, oh, you could just take a fraction of your
marketing budget and just spend it on open source development and you get better results
from your marketing.
Like because.
How did those, can I, sorry, I'm going to try not to go around here.
What have you learned from the interaction with the marketing folks on that kind of,
because you gave a great example of something that will obviously be much better investment
in terms of marketing is supporting open source projects.
The challenge is not dissimilar from the challenge you have in academia of the different
colleges, right?
Challenge gets very specific and very channeled, right?
And so people get, they get a lot of learning in the thing they know about and it's hard
then to bridge that and to get them to think differently enough to have a sense that you
might have something to offer because it's different.
It's like, well, how do I implement that?
How do I, what do I do with that?
Like, do I, which budget do I take from?
Do I slow down my spend on Google ads or my spend on Facebook ads or do I not hire a
content creator and stay like, like there's an operational aspect to that that you have
to be the CMO, right?
Or the CEO.
You have to get the right level.
So you have to hire at a high position level.
Right.
People that care about this.
Or they won't know how.
Right.
And because you can also do it very clumsily.
Yeah.
Right.
And I've seen, because you can, you absolutely have to honor and recognize the people you're
going to and the fact that if you just throw money at them, it could actually create more
problems.
Can I just say, this is not you saying.
Can I just, because I just need, I need, I need to say this.
I've been very surprised how often marketing people are terrible at marketing.
I feel like the best marketing is doing something novel and unique that anticipates the future.
It feels like so much of the marketing practice is like what they took in school or maybe
they're studying from what was the best thing that was done in the past decade.
And they're just repeating that over and over as opposed to innovating, like taking the risk.
To me, marketing.
That's a great point.
Is taking the big risk.
And being the first one to risk.
Yeah.
And they're not.
There's an aspect of data observation from that risk.
Right.
That's, that's, that's, I think it's shared what they're doing already, but it absolutely,
it's about, I think it's content.
Like there's this whole world on content marketing that you could almost say, well, yeah, it can
get over, you can get, you can get inundated with stuff that's not relevant to you.
Because what you're saying would be highly relevant and highly useful and highly, highly
beneficial.
Yeah.
But it's, it's a risk.
I mean, that's why sort of there's a lot of innovative ways of doing that.
Tesla is an example of people that basically don't do marketing.
They do marketing in a very like, let's say Elon hired a person who's just good at Twitter
for running Tesla's Twitter account.
No, right.
Right.
I mean, that's exactly what you want to be doing.
You want to be constantly innovating in the.
Right.
There's an aspect of telling.
I've definitely seen people doing great work where you're not talking about it.
Like I would say that's actually a problem I have right now with Quonsite Labs.
Quonsite Labs has been doing amazing work, really excited about it.
We have not been talking about it enough.
We haven't been.
And there's different ways to talk about it.
There's different ways to, there's different channels to which to communicate.
There's also like, I'll just throw some shade at companies I love.
So for example, iRobot, I just had a conversation with them.
They make Roombas.
Sure.
And I think I love the incredible robots, but like every time they do like advertisement
assistant, not advertisement, but like marketing type stuff, it just looks so corporate.
And to me, the incredible, maybe wrong in the case of iRobot, I don't know.
But to me, when you're talking about engineering systems, it's really nice to show off the
magic of the engineering and the software and the, all the, all the geniuses behind
this product and the tinkering and like the raw authenticity of what it takes to build
that system versus the marketing people who want to have like pretty people, like standing
there all pretty with the robots, like moving perfectly.
So to me, there's some aspect, it's like speaking to the hackers.
You have to throw some bones, some, some care towards the engineers, the developers, because
there's some aspect, one for the hiring, but two, there's an authenticity to that kind
of communication that's really inspiring to the end user as well.
Like if they know that brilliant people, the best in the world are working at your company,
they start to believe that that product that you're creating is really good.
It's interesting because your initial reaction would be, wait, there's different users here.
Why would you do that?
You know, my wife bought a Roomba Roomba, but she, and she loves developers, she loves
me, but she doesn't care about that culture.
So essentially what you said is actually the authenticity, because everyone has a friend
or everyone knows people.
There's word of mouth.
I mean, if you...
Word of mouth is so, so popular.
Yeah, exactly.
That's interesting.
Because I think it's the lack of that realization there's this halo effect that influences your
general marketing.
Interesting.
For some stupid reason, I do have a platform and it seems that the reason I have a platform,
many others like me, millions of others, is like the authenticity and like we get excited
naturally about stuff and like I don't want to get excited about that iRobot video because
it's boring, it's marketing, it's corporate, as opposed to I wanted to do some fun.
This is me like a shout out to iRobot, is they're not letting me get into the robot.
Yeah.
Well, there's an aspect of, they could be benefiting from a culture of modularity like
add ons and like that could actually dramatically help.
You've seen that over history.
I mean, Apple is an example of a company like that or the...
I can see what your point is, is that you have something that needs to be adopted broadly,
the concept needs to be adopted broadly and if you want to go beyond this one device,
you need to engage this community.
Yeah.
And connecting to the open source, as you said, I got to ask you, your programmer, one
of the most impactful programmers ever, you've led many programmers, you lead many programmers.
What are some from a programmer perspective?
What makes a good programmer?
What makes a productive programmer?
Is there a device you can give to be a great programmer as well?
That's a great, great question.
And there are times in my life I'd probably answer this even better than I hope maybe
give an answer today because I thought about this numerous times, like right now I've spent
on so much time recently hiring salespeople that your mind is a little bit on something
else.
And so I reflected on the past and also I have some really, the only way I can do this,
I have some really great programmers that I work with who lead the teams that they lead
and my goal is to inspire them and hopefully help them, encourage them and be, help them
encourage with their teams.
I would say there's a number of things, a couple of things.
One is curiosity.
I think a programmer without curiosity is mundane, like you'll lose interest, you won't
do your best work.
So it's sort of, it's an affect, it's sort of, are you, you have some curiosity about
things.
I think two, don't try to do everything at once, recognize that you're, you know, we're
limited as humans, you're limited as a human and each one of us are limited in different
ways.
You know, we all have our different strengths and skills, so it's adapting the art of programming
to your skills.
One of the things that always works is to limit what you're trying to solve, right?
So if you're part of a team, usually maybe somebody else has put the architecture together
and they've gotten given a portion for you if you're, if you're young, if you're not
part of a team, it's sort of breaking down the problem into smaller parts is essential
for you to make progress.
It's very easy to take on a big project and try to do it all at once and you get lost
and then you do it badly.
So thinking about, you know, very concretely what you're doing, defining the inputs and
outputs, defining what you want to get done, even just talking about that and like writing
down before you write code, just what are you trying to accomplish?
I mean, very specific about it, really, really helps.
I think using other people's work, right, don't, don't be afraid that somehow you're,
like you should do it all, like nobody does.
Stand on the shoulders of giants and copy and paste some stock overplay.
Copy and paste some stock overplay, it's like, but, but, but don't just copy and paste, it's
particularly relevant in the era of codecs and the, you know, the auto generated code,
which is essentially I see as an indexing of stock overflow.
Right, exactly.
Secondly, it's like.
It's a search engine.
It's a search engine over stock overflow, basically, so it's not, I mean, it's, we've
had this for a while.
Yeah.
But really, you want to cut and paste, but, but, but not blindly, like, absolutely I've
cut and paste to understand, but then you understand, oh, this is what this means.
Oh, this is what it's doing and understanding as much as you can.
So it's critical.
That's where the curiosity comes in.
If you're just blindly cutting and basting, you're not going to understand.
And so understand and then, you know, be, be sensitive to hype cycles, right?
Every, every few, every few often there's always a, oh, test driven development is the
answer.
Oh, object oriented is the answer.
Oh, like there's always an answer, you know, agile is the answer.
Be cautious of jumping onto a hype cycle.
Like likely there's signal, like there's a thing there that's, that's actually valuable
you can learn from, but it's almost certainly not the answer to everything you need.
What lessons do you draw from you having created NumPy and SciPy, like in, in service of sort
of answering the question of what it takes to be a great programmer and giving advice
to people?
Yeah.
How can you be the next person to create a SciPy?
So one is listen.
Two.
Listen.
To who?
Uh, to, uh, to people that have a problem, right, which is everybody, right, but, but
listen and listen to many and, and try to, uh, then do like don't, you're going to have
to do an experiment, you know, do fall down.
Don't be afraid to fall down.
Don't be afraid.
You know, the first thing you do is probably going to suck and that's okay, right?
It's honestly, I think iteration is the key to innovation and, and it's that, it's almost
that psychological, um, hesitation we have to just, uh, iterate like, yeah, we know,
we know it's not great, but next someone will be better.
I mean, just, just keep learning and keep proving and keep improving.
It's, it's, it's an attitude, um, and then it doesn't take intense concentration, right?
Good things don't happen just it's not quite like Tik Tok or like Facebook.
You know, you can't scroll your way to good programming, right?
There are, you know, sincere like hours of, of deep, don't be afraid of the deep problem.
Like often people will run away from something because, oh, I can't solve this and you might
be right, but give it an hour, give it a couple of hours and see and you know, just, um, five
minutes.
It's not going to, not going to give you that.
Was it lonely when you were building Saipa and Napa?
Oh, hugely.
Yeah.
Absolutely lonely in the sense of you have to have an inner drive and that inner drive
for me always comes from, I have to, I have to see that this is right in some angle.
I have to believe it, that this is the right approach, the right thing to do.
With Saipa, it was like, oh yeah, the world needs libraries in Python.
Clearly Python is popular enough with enough influential people that to start and it needs
more libraries.
Yeah.
So that is a good, you know, itself.
So I'm going to go do that good.
So find a good, find a thing that you know is good and just, just work on it.
So that has to happen and it is, and you kind of have to have enough realization of your
mission to be okay with the naysayer or the fact that not everybody joins you at front.
In fact, the one thing I've talked to people a lot, I've seen a lot of projects come and
some fail.
Like not everything I've done has actually worked perfectly.
I've tried a bunch of stuff that, okay, that didn't really work or this isn't working and
why.
But you see the patterns and one of the key things is you can't even know for six months.
I say 18 months right now.
If you're starting a new project, you got to give it a good 18 month run before you even
know if the feedback's there.
Like it's, you're not going to know in six months.
You might have the perfect thing, but six months from now it's still kind of still emerging.
So give it time because you're dealing with humans and humans have an inertial energy
that just doesn't change that quickly.
So let me ask a silly question.
But like you said, you're focused on the sales side of things currently.
But back when you were actually programming, maybe in the 90s, you talked about IDs.
What's your, a setup that you have that brings you joy, keyboard, number of screens, Linux?
I do still like to program some, it's not as much as I used to.
I have two projects I'm super interested in trying to find funding for them, trying to
figure out some good teams for them, but I could talk about those.
But yeah, I'm an Emacs guy.
Great.
Thanks.
The superior editor, everybody, I've got, I don't often delete tweets, but one of the
tweets I deleted when I said Emacs was better than Vim.
And then the hate I got, I was like, I'm walking away from this.
I do too.
I don't push it.
I mean, I'm, I'm just joking.
Of course.
Yeah, exactly.
It's kind of like, but people do take the editor seriously.
They take it seriously.
I did it as a joke.
It's your life.
It is, but there's something, there's something beautiful to me about Emacs, but that's for
people that love them.
There's something beautiful to them about that.
There is.
I mean, I do use Vim for quick editing, like command line, if I say quick editing, I will
still sometimes use it, but not much.
Like it's simple corrective, corrective single editor character.
So when you were developing SciPy, you were using Emacs?
Emacs.
Yeah.
SciPy NumPy are all written in Emacs on a Linux box and CVS and then SVN, version control.
Git came later.
Git has, I love distributed branch stuff.
I think Git is pretty complicated, but I love the concept.
And also, of course, GitHub is, and then GitLab, Git, definitely consumable, but that came
later.
Did you ever touch the list, but all day?
Like, were we, were we emotional feelings about all the parentheses?
Great question.
So I find myself appreciating lists today much more than I did early because when I came
to programming, I knew programming, but I was a domain expert, right?
And to me, the parentheses were in the way.
It's like, wow, it's just all this, like it just gets in the way of my thinking about
what I'm doing.
So why would I have all these, right?
That was my initial reaction to it.
You know, now as I appreciate kind of the structure that kind of naturally maps to the,
to a logical thinking about a program, I can appreciate them, right?
And why it's actually, you could, you could create editors that make it not so problematic,
right?
Honestly.
Yeah.
So I actually have a much more appreciation of Lisp and things like closure, and there's
high V, which is a Python, you know, a list that compiles the Python byte code.
I think it's challenging.
Like typically these languages are, you know, I even saw a whole data science programming
system in Lisp that somebody created, which is, you know, cool, but again, it's the, I
think it's the lack of recognition of the fact that there exists what I call occasional
programmers.
Yes.
People that are never going to be programmers for living.
They don't want to have all this, the cuteness in their head.
They want just.
You know, it's why basic, you know, Microsoft had the right idea with basic in terms of
having that be the language of visual basic, the language of Excel and SQL, SQL server.
They should have converted that to Python 10 years ago, but world would be a better
place if they had, but.
There's also, there's a beauty and a magic to the history behind a language in Lisp,
you know, some of the most interesting people in the history of computer science and artificial
intelligence have used the Lisp.
So.
Yeah.
You feel.
Well, it's about that language.
When you, when you have a language, you can think in it.
Yeah.
And it helps you think about it.
And it attracts a certain kinds of people that think in a certain kind of way.
And then that's, that's there.
Okay.
So what about like small laptop with a tiny keyboard or is there like three screens?
You know, good question.
I've never gotten into the big, the many screens, to be honest.
I mean, and maybe it's because in my head, I kind of just, I just swap between windows.
Like, partly because I guess I really can't process three screens at once anyway.
Like, I just, I'm looking at one and I just flip, you know, I flip an application open.
So where it's really helpful is actually when I'm trying to, you know, here's data and I
want to input it from here.
Right.
This is the only time I really need another screen.
So now, because you're both developer, lead developers, but then there's also these businesses
and their sales people in your working large companies.
Operations people, hiring people.
Yeah, the whole thing.
Which operating system is your favorite at this, at this point?
So Linux was the early days.
Linux.
So yeah, I love, love Linux as a, as a server side and it was early days I had my own Linux
desktop.
Um, I've been on Mac laptops for 10 years now.
Yeah.
This is what leadership looks like is you switch to Mac.
Okay.
Great.
Yeah.
Pretty much.
I mean, just the fact that I had to do PowerPoints, I had to do presentations and, you know, plug
in, I just couldn't mess with plugging in laptops.
It wouldn't project and yeah.
So you mentioned also Quonset Labs and things like that.
Can you give advice on how to hire great programmers and great people?
Yeah.
I would say produce an open source project, get people contributing to it and hire those
people.
Yeah.
I mean, you're doing it sort of, uh, you might, maybe perhaps a little biased, but that's
probably a hundred percent really good advice.
I find it hard to hire.
I still find it hard to hire.
Like in terms of, I don't think that it's not hard to hire if I've worked with somebody
for a couple of weeks, but a cup, an hour or two of interviews, I have no idea.
So that instinct, that radar of knowing if you're good or not, that you've, you've found
that you're still not able to really.
It's really hard.
I mean, the resume can help, but again, the resume is like a presentation of the things
they want you to see, not the reality of, of, and there's also, um, you know, you have
to understand what you're hiring for.
There are different stages and different kinds of skills.
And so it isn't just a, um, one of the things I talk a lot about internally at my company
is that the whole idea of, of measuring ourselves against a single axis is flawed because we're
not, it's a multi dimensional space and how do you order a multi dimensional space?
There isn't one ordering.
So this whole idea, you, you immediately have projected into a thing when you're talking
about hiring or best or worst or better or not better.
So what is the thing you're actually needing?
And you can hire for that.
There is such a thing.
Generally, I really value people who have the affect, uh, the care about open source.
Like, so in some cases, they're, they're affinity to open source is simply a kind of a filter
of an affect.
Um, however, I have found this interesting dichotomy between open source contributors
and product creation.
There's, I don't know if it's fully true, but there does seem to be the more, uh, the
more experienced, the more affect somebody has to an open source community, the less
ability to actually produce product that they have and the opposite is kind of true too.
The more product focused are, I find a lot of people have talked to a lot of people who
produce really great products and they, they have a, they're looking over the open source
communities, kind of wanting to participate and play, but they've played here and they
do a great job here.
And then they don't necessarily have some of the same, I don't think that, I don't think
that's entirely necessary.
I think part of it is cultural, how that's, how they've emerged, cause one of the things
that open source communities often lack is great product management, like some product
management energy.
That's brilliant.
But you want both of those energies in the same place together.
Yes.
And so it's a lot of it's creating these teams of people that have these needed skills and
attributes that are hard.
And so, so one of the big things I look for is somebody that fundamentally recognize their
need to learn, like one of the values that we, we have in all of the things we do is
learning.
Like if somebody thinks they know it all, they're going to struggle.
And some of that is just, there's more basic things like humility, just being humble in
the face of all the things you don't know.
And that's like step one of learning.
That's step one of learning, right?
And you know, I've spent a lot of time learning, right?
Other people spend a lot more time, but I've spent a lot of time learning.
I went, you know, my whole goal was to get a PhD because I love school and I wanted to
be a scientist.
And then what I found is what's been written about elsewhere as well as the more I learned,
the more I didn't know, the more I realized, man, I know about this, but this is such a
tiny thing in the global scope of what I might want to know about.
So I need to be listening a whole lot better than I am just talking.
That's changed a little bit.
Actually, my wife says that I used to be a better listener.
Now that I'm so full of all these ideas I want to do, she kind of says, you've got to
give people time to talk.
So you've succeeded on multiple dimensions.
So one is the tenure track faculty.
The other is just creating all these products and building up the businesses, then working
with businesses.
Do you have advice for young people today in high school, in college, of how to live
a life as nonlinear and as successful as yours, a life that could be, they could be proud
of?
Well, that's a super compliment.
I'm humbled by that actually.
I would say a life they can be proud of, honestly, one thing that I've said to people
is first, find people you love and care about them.
Like family matters to me a lot, and family means people you love and have committed to.
So it can be whatever you mean by that, but you need to have a foundation.
So find people you love and want to commit to and do that, because it anchors you in
a way that nothing else can.
And then you find other things, and then from out there, you find other kinds of things
you can commit to, whether it's ideas or people or groups of people.
So especially in high school, I would say, don't settle on what you think you know.
Give yourself 10 years to think about the world.
I see a lot of high school students who seem to know everything already, and I think I
did too.
I think it's maybe natural, but recognize that the things you care about, you might change
your perspective over time.
I certainly have over time, because I was really passionate about one specific thing
that kind of softened, I was a big, didn't like the Federal Reserve, and there's still,
we could have a longer conversation about monetary policy and finances, but I'm a little
more nuanced in my perspective at this point.
But that's one area where you learn about something, go, I want to attack it.
Build, don't destroy.
Build, so often the tendency is to not like something, they want to go attack it.
Build something.
Build something to replace it.
Build up.
Attract people to your new thing.
You'll be far better.
You don't need to destroy something to build something else.
So that's, I guess, generally.
And then definitely like curiosity, follow your curiosity and let it, don't just follow
the money.
And all of that, like you said, is grounded in family, friendship, and ultimately love.
Which is a great way to end it, Travis, you're one of the most impactful people in the engineer
and the computer science in the human world.
So I truly appreciate everything you've done, and I really appreciate that you would spend
your valuable time with me.
It was an honor.
It was a real pleasure for me.
I appreciate that.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Travis Oliphant.
To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, let me leave you with something that in the programming world is called Hodgson's
Law.
Every sufficiently advanced LISP application will eventually be reimplemented in Python.
Thank you for listening, and hope to see you next time.